---
title: MEDIA ADVISORY Treasury, Homeland Security, Justice Departments Join to Celebrate Law Enforcement
date: 2003-02-21
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/js51
---

*(Archived Content)*

    

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-51



**Ceremony will also highlight the realignment of law enforcement responsibilities.**



On Tuesday, February 25, 2003, Treasury Secretary John Snow, Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge and Deputy Attorney General Larry Thompson will join in a ceremony to celebrate law enforcement and highlight the transfer of agencies and new enforcement responsibilities.



The ceremony will take place at Lisner Auditorium on the The George Washington University campus.  Law enforcement officials from the three departments and the realigned bureaus and agencies will attend.



Participating:



Commissioner Robert C. Bonner - U.S. Customs ServiceDirector W. Ralph Basham - U.S. Secret ServiceDirector Connie L. Patrick Federal Law Enforcement Training CenterDirector Bradley A. Buckles Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives



Tuesday, February 25, 2003



3:00PM



Law Enforcement Day CelebrationTreasury Secretary John SnowHomeland Security Secretary Tom RidgeDeputy Attorney General Larry ThompsonLisner AuditoriumThe George Washington University730 21st Street, N.W.Washington, DC  20052



MEDIA NOTES:



The event is OPEN PRESS.  Members of the media should go to the media check-in table located in the Lisner Auditorium lobby no later than 2:30PM to receive event credentials.  Prior notification is not requested, but a government issued press pass is required.  Credentials will only be available on-site and not prior to the event.



Video photographers may arrive for set up at 1:30PM; set up must be complete by 2:30PM.  TV lighting.  Mult box.



No press availability is planned for this event.
