---
title: 'Updated: Treasury To Host Women In Finance Investment Symposium Tuesday, July 12, 2011'
date: 2011-07-11
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/07112011b
---

*(Archived Content)*

***Updated to include full agenda with panelists and participation of Chairman Goolsbee. Deadline to RSVP extended to 2:00 PM ET TODAY.***   **WASHINGTON** – On Tuesday, July 12, 2011, the U.S. Department of the Treasury will convene a Women in Finance Symposium focusing on institutional investment. Following up on the first Women in Finance Symposium in March 2010 and Treasury’s Access to Capital Conference earlier this year, the symposium will bring together senior Administration officials, private sector leaders, and institutional investors for a series of panel discussions to recognize a new group of women who have risen to leadership roles in the institutional investment space and to explore the crucial role of the capital they invest in economic growth and sustainability, entrepreneurship, and job creation in America. Tuesday’s symposium will initiate a dialogue on how institutional investors are deploying capital and managing risk and how investment practices have changed post-financial crisis. **WHO:**            Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner Senior Advisor and Assistant to the President Valerie Jarrett Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors Austan Goolsbee Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Mary Schapiro Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Financial Markets Mary Miller Treasurer of the United States Rosie Rios Obama Administration officials Prominent institutional investors and private sector leaders **WHAT:          **Women in Finance Investment Symposium **WHEN:**Tuesday, July 12, 2011   8:30 a.m. – 12:30 p.m. ET **WHERE:**       Cash Room U.S. Treasury Department        1500 Pennsylvania Ave., NW   Washington, D.C. 20220 *The event will also be streamed live on www.home.treasury.gov.* **AGENDA:** **8:30 AM – 8:40 AM    WELCOMING REMARKS: ***Valerie Jarrett, Senior Advisor and Assistant to the President* **8:40 AM – 8:50 AM    OPENING REMARKS:** *Secretary Timothy F. Geithner* **8:50 AM – 9:40 AM    PANEL 1:    Adapting and Innovating in the Financial Markets** **Moderator**: *Rosie Rios, Treasurer of the United States* **Participants** *- Anne Stausboll, CEO, CalPERS * *-Raudline Etienne, CIO, New York State Common Retirement* *-Alice Handy, Founder and President,co-CIO, CCO, Investure* *- Marie Berggren, CIO and VP of Investments, University of California * *-Susan Manske, VP and CIO, MacArthur Foundation* **9:45 AM – 10:35 AM  PANEL 2:      Exploring the New Landscape for Asset Managers** **Moderator:  ***Mary Miller, Asst. Secretary for Financial Markets, U.S. Dept. of Treasury* **Participants:** *-Adena Friedman, CFO, The Carlyle Group* *-Sue Wagner, Co-Founder, Vice Chairman, BlackRock * *-Catherine Keating, CEO, U.S. Institutional Asset Management, * *JP Morgan* *-Sonia Gardner, President, Managing Partner and Co-Founder, * *Avenue Capital* **10:35 AM – 11:00 AMBreak** **11:00 AM – 11:50 AMPANEL 3:      Investing in the Economic Recovery ** **Moderator: ***Austan Goolsbee, Chairman, Council of Economic Advisors* **Participants** *-Darcy Bradbury, Managing Director at D.E. Shaw and formerly the Assistant Secretary for Financial Markets at U.S. Dept. of Treasury* *-Kate Mitchell, Managing Director, Scale Venture Partners* *-Sonal Shah, Director, White House Office of Social Innovation* **12:00 PMCLOSING REMARKS:  ***Mary Schapiro, Chairman, US Securities and Exchange Commissio**n* **MEDIA NOTES:** *All discussions are open press but space is limited and is first come, first serve. The event will also be streamed live on www.home.treasury.gov.* *Media without Treasury press credentials planning to attend must contact Frances Anderson at frances.anderson@treasury.gov with the following information: name, Social Security number and date of birth. Congressional and White House press passes will not grant you access to Treasury. Please note if you have camera equipment. * **The deadline to RSVP has been extended to TODAY, July 11, 2011 at 2:00 PM ET.** *Press with camera equipment should arrive at the Moat Entrance (south side of the Treasury building, adjacent to the Hamilton entrance) no later than 7:00 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and escorts to the Cash Room. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. All other media can enter the Treasury building through the Pennsylvania Avenue entrance and should allow 45 minutes to clear through security. **Final access to the Cash Room will be 8:15 a.m.***
