---
title: '*Media Advisory* Financial Stability Oversight Council Announces Upcoming Meeting Details'
date: 2011-07-12
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/07122011
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that the next Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) meeting will be held Monday, July 18th in Treasury’s Cash Room. There will be both a closed and an open session. The open session will be focused on the one-year anniversary of the Dodd-Frank Act. The FSOC also will be holding a closed meeting on Wednesday, July 13th to review and prepare materials for the open meeting next week. The open session agenda will be released in the days ahead. **WHO:**   Members of the Financial Stability Oversight Council **WHEN:**11:30 AM EST, Monday, July 18, 2011 **WHERE:**       U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room 1500 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W. Washington, DC *This event is open to the press, and will be streamed live from the Department of Treasury’s website at LINK.* **Members of the media interested in covering the event must RSVP by 2:00 PM, Friday, July 15, 2011. ** Media attending with camera equipment should arrive at the Moat Entrance (south side of the Treasury building, adjacent to the Hamilton entrance) at 9:45am to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by 11:00am and should enter the Treasury building through the Pennsylvania Avenue Entrance. **Please Note:** Media without Treasury press credentials planning to attend must contact Frances Anderson in Treasury’s Office of Public Affairs at (202) 622-2960 with the following information: name, Social Security number, date of birth and country of citizenship. This information also may be emailed to [frances.anderson@treasury.gov](mailto:frances.anderson@treasury.gov). Congressional and White House press passes will not grant one access to Treasury.
