---
title: Obama Administration Announces Additional Details for Upcoming Conference to Explore Access to Capital For Small Companies
date: 2011-03-18
draft: false
press_release_number: TG1111
url: /news/media-advisories/tg1111
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – Today, the Obama Administration announced additional details about its March 22nd conference:* “Access to Capital: Fostering Growth and Innovation for Small Companies.”*The conference will bring together policymakers, entrepreneurs, investors, academics, and other market participants to explore how both the public and private sectors can help promote access to capital at each stage of growth for a small company – from seed capital, to growth equity, to accessing the public markets.   Panel moderators will include Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner, Small Business Administration Administrator Karen Mills, and Scott Case, CEO of the Startup America Partnership and Co-founder of Priceline.   Details regarding the event, including an agenda, topics for panel discussions, panel participants, and logistics for members of the media seeking to attend the conference, are below. **Media Logistics:**   **WHAT**:         Access to Capital Conference: Fostering Growth and Innovation for Small Companies **WHEN:**          March, 22, 2011 
8:30 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. EDT **WHERE:       **U.S. Treasury Department  
Cash Room 
1500 Pennsylvania Ave., NW 
Washington, DC 
**Agenda:**   **8:30 AM EDT ** **OPENING REMARKS** 
Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner and Small Business Administration Administrator Karen Mills 
**8:50 AM EDT **
PANEL DISCUSSION *Pre-IPO Funding: Seed Capital, Angel Investors, Venture Capital, and Growth Equity* 
Moderator:Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner Panelists: 
- Desh Deshpande, Chairman of Sparta Group and Member of the National Advisory Council on Innovation and Entrepreneurship (NACIE)
- Alex Laskey, President and Founder of OPOWER
- Ann Miura-Ko, Partner at Floodgate Capital and Lecturer at Stanford University
- Duane McKnight, Senior Partner of SYNCOM
- Joann Price, Co-founder and Partner at Fairview Capital
**9:45 AM EDT **
PANEL DISCUSSION *IPOs and Alternative Liquidity Platforms: Capital Market Access for Small Businesses* Moderator:Scott Case, CEO of Startup America Partnership and Co-founder of Priceline 
Panelists: 
- Paul Deninger, Senior Managing Director at Evercore Partners
- Seth Goldman, Founder of Honest Tea
- Bob McCooey, Senior Vice President of New Listings and Capital Markets at NASDAQ
- Kate Mitchell, Managing Director at Scale Venture Partners and Chairman of the National Venture Capital Association
- Chuck Newhall, Co-founder of New Enterprise Associates
**11:00 AM EDT **
PANEL DISCUSSION *Accessing Credit Throughout the Lifecycle of a Small Company* Moderator:Small Business Administration Administrator Karen Mills Panelists: 
- Michael Arougheti, President of Ares Capital
- William Bynum, CEO of HOPE Enterprise Corporation
- Greg Becker, President of Silicon Valley Bank
- Jessica Jackley, CEO of Profounder and Founder of KIVA
**12:15 PM EDT ** 
WORKING BREAKOUT LUNCHES 
Hosted by Senior Obama Administration Officials Breakout Session Topics: 
- Spurring Innovation: Transforming an Idea into a Business
- Capitalizing a Growing Company: Growth Equity and Debt Financing
- Financing Small-Cap Companies: IPOs, Credit and Alternative Liquidity Platforms
Coverage:Breakout sessions are open to pen and pad correspondents only. No recording devices for broadcast purposes will be allowed. Space is limited and will be allocated on a first-come, first-served basis. Interested reporters should gather at 12:05 PM at the Cash Room press riser for escort. **2:10PM EDT ** **CLOSING REMARKS** 
Gene Sperling, Director of the National Economic Council and 
Jeffrey Immelt, Chairman of the President’s Council on Jobs and Competiveness and CEO of General Electric   **Media Notes:***Conference panels and official remarks are all open to all press; working breakout lunches are open to pen and pad correspondents only. Space is limited and is first come, first serve. The event will also be streamed live at link. * *Media without Treasury press credentials planning to attend must contact Frances Anderson in Treasury's Office of Public Affairs at (202) 622-2960 with the following information: full name, Social Security number, date of birth, and country of citizenship.  This information may also be emailed to frances.anderson@treasury.gov. **Congressional and White House press passes will not grant you access to Treasury. Please note if you have camera equipment. **The deadline to RSVP is Monday, March 21st at Noon EST. *** *Press with camera equipment should arrive at the Moat Entrance (south side of the Treasury building, adjacent to the Hamilton entrance) no later than 7:00 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and escorts to the Cash Room. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. All other media can enter the Treasury building through the Pennsylvania Avenue entrance and should allow 45 minutes to clear through security. Final access to the Cash Room will be 8:15 a.m.*​
