---
title: 'Wednesday: Secretary Geithner to Discuss Economy with Chicago Business Leaders, Tour Local Ford Motor Company Plant'
date: 2012-04-02
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/04022012c
---

*(Archived Content)*



**WASHINGTON -**On Wednesday, April 4, Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner will travel to Illinois to deliver remarks before the Economic Club of Chicago and tour a local Ford Motor Company facility.  In his remarks before local business leaders, the Secretary will take stock of the U.S. economy since President Obama took office – from the legacy of the crisis to recent signs of a strengthening recovery. He will also outline the primary economic imperatives facing the country and the importance of making sure that we address our deficits in the context of our broader economic challenges.

  

Later in the day, Secretary Geithner will tour Ford’s Chicago Stamping Plant to highlight the importance of investing in manufacturing and innovative technologies to create jobs and build a stronger American economy. At the plant, he will also highlight the resurgence of the American automotive industry, which has added more than 200,000 jobs in the last two-and-a-half years.

  

**Press Logistics**

  

**Wednesday, April 4, 2012**

  

**8:00 AM CDT**



**Secretary Tim Geithner**



**Remarks before the Economic Club of Chicago and Q&A with Chairman John A. Canning, Jr. **



**The Hilton Chicago**



**Grand Ballroom**



**720 South Michigan Avenue**



**Chicago, IL **



This event is open press. Media with satellite trucks and camera equipment should arrive by 6:30 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up.  All other press should arrive by 7:00 a.m. Media planning to attend must RSVP to James Chase at[james_chase@jtpr.com](mailto:james_chase@jtpr.com)or (312) 573 – 5476.

  

**12:15 PM CDT**



**Secretary Tim Geithner**



**Tour of Ford Motor Company’s Chicago Stamping Plant**



**1000 East Lincoln Highway**



**Chicago Heights, IL 60411**



There will be a b-roll opportunity of the Secretary’s tour of Ford’s Chicago Stamping Plant for TV cameras and still photographers. There will be press call times and information on security sweeps to follow.**For safety purposes, visitors must wear flat, closed-toe shoes with hard soles. **Media planning to attend must RSVP to[Karen.mellen@bm.com](mailto:Karen.mellen@bm.com).

  

###
