---
title: 'FRIDAY: Treasury Hosts Finance Data Conference'
date: 2012-11-28
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/11282012
---

*(Archived Content)*

**FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: November 28, 2012 ** **CONTACT: Treasury Public Affairs (202) 622-2960**   **** MEDIA ADVISORY****   **FRIDAY: Treasury Hosts Finance Data Conference **   **WASHINGTON – **On Friday, November 30, 2012, the U.S. Department of the Treasury will host a Finance Data Conference to explore how data sets published by federal agencies can be harnessed by the private sector to help empower consumers to take control of their financial lives. The Finance Data Conference is part of Treasury’s Finance Data Initiative, an effort to foster dialogue with the private sector and to promote the availability of federal data sets that entrepreneurs, financial institutions, and other innovators can use to create products that help Americans make informed financial decisions. As part of the Finance Data Initiative, Treasury recently [launched](http://links.govdelivery.com/track?type=click&enid=ZWFzPTEmbWFpbGluZ2lkPTIwMTIxMTI4LjEyNjkyNDIxJm1lc3NhZ2VpZD1NREItUFJELUJVTC0yMDEyMTEyOC4xMjY5MjQyMSZkYXRhYmFzZWlkPTEwMDEmc2VyaWFsPTE2OTkzMzM4JmVtYWlsaWQ9c3RlcGhhbmllLm1hQHRyZWFzdXJ5LmdvdiZ1c2VyaWQ9c3RlcGhhbmllLm1hQHRyZWFzdXJ5LmdvdiZmbD0mZXh0cmE9TXVsdGl2YXJpYXRlSWQ9JiYm&&&100&&&http://www.treasury.gov/connect/blog/Pages/data-dot-gov-launch.aspx) the Finance Data Directory available at [www.treasury.gov/financedata](http://www.treasury.gov/financedata).  The Finance Data Directory makes over fifty federal data sets from multiple federal agencies available to the public in one convenient location.  **WHO:              ** 
- Deputy Treasury Secretary Neal Wolin
- U.S. Chief Technology Officer and Assistant to the President Todd Park
**WHEN:        ** Friday, November 30, 2012 11:00 AM EST   **WHERE:          ** U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, D.C.   This event is open press.  A live webcast of the open session will be available at [https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts](h/news/webcasts). All interested media, including press credentialed with Treasury, should **RSVP by 4:00 p.m. EST Thursday, November 29**, to Ronda Buckmon at [Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov](mailto:Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov).  Media without Treasury press credentials must include the following information for access into the building: full legal name, date of birth, Social Security number, and country of citizenship.  Press with camera equipment must also include a brief description of equipment.   Press with camera equipment should arrive at the Alexander Hamilton entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Avenue) by 9:30 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps.  All other press must arrive at the North entrance (15th Street and New York Avenue) no later than 10:45 a.m. and proceed to room 2127.  No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in.   ###​
