---
title: "Deputy Secretary Wolin to Visit Central and Southern Africa, November 12-15, 2012"
date: 2012-11-09
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/11092012b
---
*(Archived Content)*
 
**Visit will Highlight Importance of Strengthening Economic Governance and Transparency**, **Improving Business Climates, and Combatting Money Laundering and Terrorism Financing**
 
**WASHINGTON –** The U.S. Department of the Treasury announced today that Deputy
 
 
 
Secretary Neal S. Wolin will travel to the Republic of the Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Angola, and Botswana on November 12-15, 2012. The Deputy Secretary will engage with African governments to promote efforts to foster broad-based growth and development in the region, strengthen economic governance and institutional accountability, increase transparency in the extractive industries, imp​rove the region’s business climate, and combat money laundering and terrorism financing.
 
 
 
 On Monday, November 12, Deputy Secretary Wolin will meet with senior government officials in Brazzaville, Republic of the Congo to discuss key economic and structural challenges in the fourth largest oil-producing country in Africa. The Deputy Secretary will discuss the importance of sound resource revenue management, strong economic governance, and economic diversification.
 
 
 
On Tuesday, November 13, the Deputy Secretary will travel to Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), to engage with key officials on finance and development issues. The Deputy Secretary will encourage continued progress on economic reforms and enhanced transparency, particularly in the extractive industries, as well as progress on combating money laundering and terrorist financing. Deputy Secretary Wolin will express U.S. support for policies that will sustain inclusive growth, strengthen DRC institutions, and improve the DRC’s business environment.
 
 
 
 On Wednesday, November 14, Deputy Secretary Wolin will meet with senior government officials and members of the private sector, including U.S. investors, in Luanda, Angola. Angola has experienced stronger economic growth following disruptions in 2009 due to the global financial crisis. The Deputy Secretary’s meetings with Angolan officials will explore how the country can effectively utilize its natural resource revenues to sustain growth and address critical social needs. The Deputy Secretary will also discuss Angola’s cooperation with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) to implement measures to prevent money laundering and combat terrorist financing.
 
 
 
On Thursday, November 15, the Deputy Secretary will meet with senior government officials in Gaborone, Botswana. Botswana has been one of the most stable countries in Africa and has reached middle-income status after years of steady growth. The Deputy Secretary will discuss the government’s successful management of revenues and how Botswana can serve as an example for the region. He will also express U.S. support for the government’s efforts to promote economic diversification and new engines of growth. Finally, he will meet with businesspeople and young entrepreneurs to discuss the importance of innovation and enhancing the role of the private sector.
 

 
 
 
###​