---
title: "Thursday: Office of Financal Research (OFR) and Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) Co-Host 2nd Annual Conference"
date: 2012-12-04
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/12042012
---
*(Archived Content)*
​*****MEDIA ADVISORY**​*** 

 
 
 
**Thursday: Office of Financal Research and Financial Stability Oversight Council Co-Host Second Annual Conference **
 
**WASHINGTON – **On Thursday, December 6, 2012, the Office of Financial Research and the Financial Stability Oversight Council will co-host their second annual conference, entitled Assessing Financial Intermediation: Measurement and Analysis. The conference will bring together thought leaders from the research and regulatory communities, public interest groups and the financial services industry to discuss challenges to financial stability posed by evolving financial activities. This year’s conference will examine recent changes in financial institutions, markets, and activities, and will explore the future implications for financial stability, risk management, and policy.
 
**WHO:   **Office of Financial Research               Financial Stability Oversight Council
 
**WHAT:          **“Assessing Financial Intermediation: Measurement and Analysis**” Conference**
 
**WHEN:          **Thursday, December 6, 2012   8:15 a.m. – 5 p.m.
 
 
 
**WHERE:       **U.S. Department of the Treasury
 
Cash Room
 
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
 
Washington, D.C.
 
THE CONFERENCE WILL ALSO BE WEBCAST LIVE at [https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts](http://links.govdelivery.com/track?type=click&enid=ZWFzPTEmbWFpbGluZ2lkPTIwMTIxMjA0LjEyOTUyNzUxJm1lc3NhZ2VpZD1NREItUFJELUJVTC0yMDEyMTIwNC4xMjk1Mjc1MSZkYXRhYmFzZWlkPTEwMDEmc2VyaWFsPTE2OTk2NjIyJmVtYWlsaWQ9c3RlcGhhbmllLm1hQHRyZWFzdXJ5LmdvdiZ1c2VyaWQ9c3RlcGhhbmllLm1hQHRyZWFzdXJ5LmdvdiZmbD0mZXh0cmE9TXVsdGl2YXJpYXRlSWQ9JiYm&&&100&&&/news/webcasts). 
 
All sessions are open press. Following is a draft agenda, which is subject to change:
 

 
**8:15 a.m.         Introduction **
 
  Richard Berner, Counselor to the Secretary
 
**8:30 a.m.         Welcoming Remarks **
 
  Mary J. Miller, Under Secretary for Domestic Finance
 
**8:45 a.m.         Framing the Analysis    **
 
Nicola Cetorelli, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
 
**9:20 a.m.         Panel 1: The Current and Future Roles of Banks and Nonbanks in the Intermediation Process**
 

 
**10:40 a.m.       Panel 2: The Future of Short Term Funding Markets**
 
**12:00 p.m.      Lunch: Keynote Address**
 
**  **Henry Kaufman, Henry Kaufman & Company, Inc.
 
 
 
**1:15 p.m.        Panel 3: Data Gaps for Nonbank Intermediation and Short Term Funding**
 
**2:35 p.m.        Panel 4: Data Standards for Nonbank Intermediation and Short Term Funding**
 
**3:45 p.m.        Panel 5: Implications for Financial Stability and Risk Analysis**
 
**4:50 p.m.        Closing Remarks**
 

 
All interested members of the media, including press credentialed with Treasury, should **RSVP by 4:00 p.m. EST Wednesday, December 5**, to Stephanie Ma at [Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov](mailto:Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov). Media without Treasury press credentials must include the following information for access into the building: full legal name, date of birth, Social Security number, and country of citizenship.  Press with camera equipment must also include a brief description of equipment. 
 
 
 
Press with camera equipment should arrive at the Alexander Hamilton entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Avenue) by 7:30 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps. All other press must arrive at the North entrance (15th Street and New York Avenue) no later than 8:00 a.m. and proceed to room 2127. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in.
 
###