---
title: Secretary Geithner to Visit India and Japan, October 9-13, 2012
date: 2012-09-12
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/09122012
---

*(Archived Content)*

  

Third U.S.-India Economic and Financial Partnership Meeting to Focus on Growing Economic Ties,



Efforts to Advance Economic Reforms and Boost GrowthAnnual World Bank and IMF Meetings in Tokyo to Focus on Boosting Global Stability and Growth



**WASHINGTON – **The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner will travel to Delhi and Mumbai, India on October 9-10, 2012 and Tokyo, Japan on October 11-13, 2012.



On October 9, 2012, the Secretary will be in Delhi, India to participate in the third annual meeting of the U.S.-India Economic and Financial Partnership with Indian Finance Minister Palaniappan Chidambaram. The meeting will conclude with a joint press conference with Minister Chidambaram.  Later that day, Secretary Geithner will participate in a moderated discussion hosted by the Confederation of Indian Industry and the US-India Business Council. On October 10, 2012, Secretary Geithner will travel to Mumbai, the country’s financial center, to meet with Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Governor Duvvuri Subbarao, as well as Indian business leaders from a variety of industries.



The U.S.-India Economic and Financial Partnership has served as a platform for greater cooperation on economic issues of importance to both nations. Both countries recognize the importance of expanding bilateral economic engagement, noting the rapid growth of U.S.-India economic ties and the increasing range of global macroeconomic and financial issues, including those related to illicit finance, on which the United States and India cooperate.



On October 11-13, 2012, Secretary Geithner will be in Tokyo, Japan for the annual meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). While there, the Secretary will also participate in a series of bilateral meetings with his counterparts to discuss efforts to boost global stability and economic growth.Additional details regarding bilateral meetings and the rest of the Secretary’s schedule will be available in the weeks ahead.



**Please note: the deadline for applying for credentials for the annual meetings of the World Bank and IMF is Friday, October 12, 2012. For more information, visit **[**https://www-amsweb-ext.imf.org/press-ext/reg.aspx**](https://www-amsweb-ext.imf.org/press-ext/reg.aspx)**.**



Travel arrangements will be the responsibility of each media organization. On October 9, members of the press are advised to travel from Delhi to Mumbai after the last event of the day concludes at 5:30 pm local time. On October 10, members of the press are advised to travel from Mumbai to Tokyo in the evening and arrive the next morning. The Office of Public Affairs, in conjunction with the U.S. Embassy in India, is able to assist with hotel accommodations in India for a limited number of journalists. To request a hotel reservation for the trip, please email[ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov](mailto:ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov)with your name(s), credit card information and anticipated dates of travel by noon on Wednesday, September 19, 2012. Hotel reservations in Tokyo will be the responsibility of each media organization.



A visa is required for travel to both India and Japan; reporters are advised to apply**immediately **to ensure adequate time for processing. For visa information, visit[https://indiavisa.travisaoutsourcing.com/homepage](http://links.govdelivery.com/track?type=click&enid=ZWFzPTEmbWFpbGluZ2lkPTIwMTIwNjExLjgyMDU3MTEmbWVzc2FnZWlkPU1EQi1QUkQtQlVMLTIwMTIwNjExLjgyMDU3MTEmZGF0YWJhc2VpZD0xMDAxJnNlcmlhbD0xNjg5NDAwMiZlbWFpbGlkPWthcmEuYWxhaW1vQHRyZWFzdXJ5LmdvdiZ1c2VyaWQ9a2FyYS5hbGFpbW9AdHJlYXN1cnkuZ292JmZsPSZleHRyYT1NdWx0aXZhcmlhdGVJZD0mJiY=&&&100&&&https://indiavisa.travisaoutsourcing.com/homepage)and[http://www.us.emb-japan.go.jp/english/html/travel_and_visa/travel_and_visa_index.htm](http://www.us.emb-japan.go.jp/english/html/travel_and_visa/travel_and_visa_index.htm).



If you are planning to attend, please email Ronda Buckmon at[ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov](mailto:ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov)with your likely travel dates and contact information, so Treasury can communicate logistical updates as necessary.



###​
