---
title: U.S. Treasury Under Secretary Brainard to attend APEC Finance Ministers meeting, August 29-30, 2012
date: 2012-08-16
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/08162012
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that Treasury Under Secretary for International Affairs Lael Brainard will travel to Moscow, Russia to attend the 2012 Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Meeting of Finance Ministers on August 29-30, 2012. Under Secretary Brainard will participate in a meeting of regional finance ministers focused on policies to strengthen the global recovery and bring about strong, sustained and more balanced growth in order to boost job creation and incomes in the United States and throughout the APEC region. The APEC economies, comprising many of the most dynamic and fastest-growing economies in the world, account for almost 60 percent of U.S. goods exports.  **Travel arrangements and hotel accommodations will be the responsibility of each media organization.** Suggested date of arrival is Wednesday, August 29, 2012 with a return of Friday, August 31, 2012. Currently, press opportunities are scheduled for Thursday, August 30, including a pooled photo spray and a press conference at the conclusion of the meeting. Additional details will be announced in the coming weeks. If you are planning to attend, please email Ronda Buckmon at [ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov](mailto:ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov) with your likely travel dates and contact information, so Treasury can communicate logistical updates as necessary. **Media credentials**: Online registration is available at [www.apec2012.ru](http://links.govdelivery.com/track?type=click&enid=ZWFzPTEmbWFpbGluZ2lkPTIwMTIwODE2Ljk4MjUyNDEmbWVzc2FnZWlkPU1EQi1QUkQtQlVMLTIwMTIwODE2Ljk4MjUyNDEmZGF0YWJhc2VpZD0xMDAxJnNlcmlhbD0xNjkzMzM1NiZlbWFpbGlkPXN0ZXBoYW5pZS5tYUB0cmVhc3VyeS5nb3YmdXNlcmlkPXN0ZXBoYW5pZS5tYUB0cmVhc3VyeS5nb3YmZmw9JmV4dHJhPU11bHRpdmFyaWF0ZUlkPSYmJg==&&&100&&&http://www.apec2012.ru/). The deadline to register for media credentials is August 30. ###​
