---
title: '*UPDATED* Wednesday: Secretary Geithner to Visit Siemens Energy Plant in North Carolina and Meet with Local Business Leaders'
date: 2012-01-24
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/01242012
---

*(Archived Content)*

**Following State of the Union Address, Visit to Highlight the President’s Efforts to Create Jobs** **WASHINGTON –** On Wednesday, January 25, Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner will tour Siemens Charlotte Energy Hub in North Carolina to highlight the importance of investing in manufacturing and innovative technologies to create jobs and build a stronger American economy.  He will also meet with local business leaders at the Charlotte Chamber of Commerce to discuss the state of the economy and the President’s efforts to create jobs, including policies to strengthen the ability of U.S. companies and businesses to compete abroad. Siemens Energy has invested more than $350 million in Charlotte in the last four years - an investment that will create more than 1,000 jobs, many of them highly-skilled, at the facility in the next three years, bringing the total number of employees to more than 1,800.  The company’s Charlotte plant recently underwent a $130 million expansion to strengthen its export capabilities. **Press Logistics** **Wednesday, January 25, 2012** 12:30 PM EST SECRETARY GEITHNER TOURS SIEMENS CHARLOTTE ENERGY HUB Charlotte Plant 5101 Westinghouse Boulevard Charlotte, North Carolina There will be a b-roll opportunity of the Secretary’s tour of Siemen’s facilities for TV cameras and still photographers.  **For security purposes, media with camera equipment and satellite trucks should arrive by 11:00 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up.  All other media should arrive by 11:30 a.m. For safety purposes, visitors must wear flat, closed-toe shoes with hard soles.  Heels and running shoes are prohibited.  **For additional information, please contact Katie Walton at [katie.walton@siemens.com](mailto:katie.walton@siemens.com).  2:15 PM EST CONVERSATION ON THE ECONOMY WITH SECRETARY GEITHNER MODERATED BY CHARLOTTE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE CHAIR FRANK EMORY Charlotte Chamber of Commerce, Belk Action Center 330 South Tryon Street Charlotte, North Carolina This event is open press.  **The satellite truck for the pool should arrive at the Chamber of Commerce by 10:00 a.m.  Media with camera equipment and satellite trucks should arrive by 1:00 p.m. for pre-set.  All other media should arrive by 1:30 p.m.**  For additional information, please contact Natalie Dick at [ndick@charlottechamber.com](mailto:ndick@charlottechamber.com).     ###​
