---
title: "Secretary Geithner to Visit India, June 27-28, 2012"
date: 2012-06-11
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/06112012b
---
*(Archived Content)*
***Third U.S.-India Economic and Financial Partnership Meeting to Focus on Growing Economic Ties,​ ******Efforts to Advance Economic Reforms and Boost Growth***  
   
 
**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner will visit India on June 27-28, 2012. On Wednesday, June 27, the Secretary will be in Delhi to participate in the third annual meeting of the U.S.-India Economic and Financial Partnership with Indian Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee. On Thursday, June 28, 2012, Secretary Geithner will visit Mumbai, the country’s financial center, to meet with Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Governor Duvvuri Subbarao and also meet with Indian business leaders from a variety of industries. Additional details regarding the Secretary’s schedule will be available in the weeks ahead. 
 
The U.S.-India Economic and Financial Partnership has served as a platform for greater cooperation on economic issues of importance to both nations.  Both countries recognize the importance of expanding bilateral economic engagement, noting the rapid growth of U.S.-India economic ties and the increasing range of global macroeconomic and financial issues on which the United States and India cooperate.  
 
   
 
Partnership activities over the last three years have focused on three broad areas – macroeconomic policy, the financial sector, and infrastructure financing.  Cabinet-level meetings, alternately held in the United States and India, have been led by Secretary Geithner and Minister Mukherjee.  Working group meetings held throughout the year have advanced discussions on specific economic areas. In addition to discussing these activities, Secretary Geithner will also discuss issues related to illicit finance, including the implementation of international sanctions.
 
 
 
Travel arrangements will be the responsibility of each media organization. Members of the press are advised to travel from Delhi to Mumbai after the last event of the day concludes at 5:30 pm local time on June 27. The Office of Public Affairs, in conjunction with the U.S. Embassy, is able to assist with hotel accommodations for a limited number of journalists. To request a hotel reservation for the trip, please email [ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov](mailto:ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov) with your name(s), credit card information and anticipated dates of travel by **3:00 pm on Friday, June 15**. Please note, a visa is required for travel to India; please apply **as soon as possible** to ensure adequate time for processing. For visa information, visit: [https://indiavisa.travisaoutsourcing.com/homepage](https://indiavisa.travisaoutsourcing.com/homepage). 
 
 
 
###
 ​