---
title: "Deputy Assistant Secretary Corwin to Travel to Europe, Asia, September 17-28 to Discuss FATCA Implementation"
date: 2012-09-17
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/09172012B
---
*(Archived Content)*
 
Corwin to Meet with Government Officials to Discuss Efforts to Combat Offshore Tax Evasion 
 
**WASHINGTON**** –** The U.S. Department of the Treasury announced today that Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Tax Affairs Manal Corwin will travel to Europe on September 17-21 and to Asia on September 24-28. Corwin will meet with members of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), members of the Global Forum on Tax and Transparency, government officials, and business leaders to discuss the implementation of the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) and global efforts to combat offshore tax evasion
 
In response to interest expressed by numerous EU member countries to conclude FATCA intergovernmental agreements, Corwin will attend a meeting in Brussels hosted by the European Commission.  The meeting, which will be held on Tuesday, September 18, will include government officials from all EU member states.  The remainder of the week Corwin will be in Paris. On Thursday, Corwin will lead a briefing session on FATCA and the Model Intergovernmental Agreements for financial industry stakeholders.  This meeting is hosted by the OECD with the participation of the Business and Industry Advisory Committee (BIAC) to the OECD. On Friday, Corwin will attend a meeting of the Steering Group of the Global Forum on Tax and Transparency. 
 
Throughout the week, Corwin will participate in bilateral meetings with government officials from various European and non-European jurisdictions who have expressed interest in further progress toward concluding FATCA agreements. 
 
The following week, Corwin will meet in Singapore with government officials and business leaders across Asia to discuss FATCA implementation and to engage with interested jurisdictions regarding the possibility of concluding intergovernmental agreements.  
 

 
###