---
title: 'Tomorrow: Secretary Lew to visit Patton, a Maryland Technology Exporter'
date: 2013-11-06
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/11062013
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON –** Tomorrow, Thursday, November 7, 2013, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will visit a family-owned business and exporter of telecommunications equipment in Gaithersburg, Maryland. The visit to Patton Electronics Company highlights the Administration’s efforts to promote American exports and expand opportunities for U.S. workers and businesses. Patton Electronics Company is a participant in the Export-Import Bank’s Working Capital Lender Loan Guarantee program since 2000. The company exports its network access and connectivity products to more than 120 countries around the world and cites that sales to international customers contribute to more than 70% of its business. Today, Patton employs nearly 100 workers in the Gaithersburg community in manufacturing, engineering, and marketing.  **Press Logistics: ** **TOMORROW, Thursday, November 7** **10:00 AM EDT** SECRETARY LEW TOURS PATTON ELECTRONICS COMPANY Patton Electronics Company 7622 Rickenbacker Drive Gaithersburg, MD 20879 There will be a b-roll opportunity of the Secretary’s tour for TV cameras and still photographers. Media planning to attend must RSVP to Sarah Logan at [Sarah.Logan@treasury.gov](mailto:Sarah.Logan@treasury.gov) TODAY, November 6 by 5:00 p.m. Press should arrive by 9:30 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. Press call time is subject to change.    ###​
