---
title: 'TUESDAY: In Visit to Cleveland, Secretary Lew to Tour Vitamix, Discuss State of U.S. Economy at City Club of Cleveland'
date: 2013-05-01
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/05012013
---

*(Archived Content)*

**Secretary Lew to Discuss Importance of Growing the Economy, Creating Jobs and Strengthening the Middle Class** **WASHINGTON -** On Tuesday, May 7, 2013, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will visit the Cleveland, Ohio area to tour Vitamix Corporation’s manufacturing facility, highlighting the importance of investing in manufacturing and innovative technologies to strengthen the middle class, increase the momentum of the recovery and speed the pace of job creation. Later in the day, the Secretary will deliver remarks before the City Club of Cleveland and participate in a conversation about the state of the U.S. economy. In his remarks, Secretary Lew will review the Administration’s efforts to strengthen the economic recovery through targeted investments to create jobs, improve our competitiveness and lay the foundation for long-term growth while putting the nation on a sound fiscal course. While in Cleveland, the Secretary will also participate in a roundtable discussion about the economy with local business and community leaders. The roundtable, which is hosted by NorTech, a regional non-profit technology-based economic development organization, is closed press.  Vitamix’s suburban Cleveland facility designs and manufactures blending equipment for both the food service industry and home kitchens. Family-owned and based in Ohio, Vitamix’s products have been exported to more than 100 countries, and the company has seen its international exports double in the last two years. Vitamix employs more than 700 workers, 400 of which support Vitamix’s manufacturing operations in Greater Cleveland, and the company’s planned expansion is projected to employ hundreds of more people in the community. **Press Logistics: ** **2:00 PM EDT** SECRETARY LEW TOURS VITAMIX MANUFACTURING FACILITY Vitamix Corporation 23221 Morgan Court Strongsville, Ohio *There will be a b-roll opportunity of the Secretary’s tour of Vitamix for TV cameras and still photographers. Media planning to attend must RSVP to Cristy Cote at ccote@fallscommunications.com. Press should arrive by 1:00 p.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. Press call time is subject to change.   * **4:30 PM EDT** REMARKS AND CONVERSATION ON THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY WITH SECRETARY LEW City Club of Cleveland 850 Euclid Avenue Cleveland, Ohio *This event is open press. A live webcast will be available here: www.cityclub.org. Media planning to attend must RSVP to Carrie Miller at cmiller@cityclub.org. To allow enough time for security screening, media with camera equipment must arrive by 3:30 p.m. All other press must arrive by 4:00 p.m. Press call time is subject to change. * ###​​​
