---
title: "WEDNESDAY: Ahead of Independence Day, Secretary Lew to welcome new U.S. Citizens, deliver remarks at Naturalization Ceremony"
date: 2013-06-27
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/06272013
---
*(Archived Content)*
 **WASHINGTON**— On Wednesday, July 3, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will deliver remarks and preside over a naturalization ceremony for 30 new U.S. citizens at the U.S. Department of the Treasury. U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) Director Alejandro Mayorkas will administer the Oath of Allegiance. **WHO:**             Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) Director Alejandro Mayorkas **WHAT:** Remarks of Secretary Lew at Naturalization Ceremony Hosted at Treasury Department **WHEN:         ** Wednesday, July 3, 2013 10:00 a.m. EDT **WHERE:      ** U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, DC *This event is open press. There will also be a live webcast at* [https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts](http://links.govdelivery.com/track?type=click&enid=ZWFzPTEmbWFpbGluZ2lkPTIwMTMwNTI5LjE5MzAyOTcxJm1lc3NhZ2VpZD1NREItUFJELUJVTC0yMDEzMDUyOS4xOTMwMjk3MSZkYXRhYmFzZWlkPTEwMDEmc2VyaWFsPTE3MTQwNTYxJmVtYWlsaWQ9c3RlcGhhbmllLm1hQHRyZWFzdXJ5LmdvdiZ1c2VyaWQ9c3RlcGhhbmllLm1hQHRyZWFzdXJ5LmdvdiZmbD0mZXh0cmE9TXVsdGl2YXJpYXRlSWQ9JiYm&&&100&&&/news/webcasts)*. Members of the media who wish to attend must **RSVP by 4:00 p.m. on Friday, June 28** to Ronda Buckmon at Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov.  Members of the media who are not credentialed with the U.S. Department of the Treasury must provide Ms. Buckmon with the following information for access into the building: full legal name, date of birth, Social Security number and country of citizenship. * *Press with camera equipment should arrive at the Alexander Hamilton entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Avenue) and proceed to the Moat entrance** no later than 8:00 a.m.** to allow time for equipment sweeps. All other media must arrive by 9:30 a.m. at the main entrance on 15th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue.  No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in.* ###