---
title: Secretary Lew to Attend IMF, World Bank Spring Meetings and G-20
date: 2013-04-15
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/04152013b
---

*(Archived Content)*

**TREASURY SECRETARY JACOB J. LEW TO ATTEND IMF, WORLD BANK SPRING MEETINGS AND G-20 MEETING OF FINANCE MINISTERS AND CENTRAL BANK GOVERNORS**   

**WASHINGTON **– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that Secretary Jacob J. Lew will attend the spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank, and the G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting in Washington, April 17-19, 2013.



Ahead of the meetings, on Wednesday, April 17, Secretary Lew will deliver remarks on the global economy and participate in a moderated discussion with The Wall Street Journal’s David Wessel at the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS).



On April 18, Secretary Lew will deliver brief remarks at a meeting of the Equal Futures Partnership at the World Bank on efforts to expand women’s political and economic participation.



Later that evening, the Secretary will attend a G-20 working dinner and continue meetings with the G-20 the next day at the IMF in Washington to discuss the state of the global economy and policies to ensure stability in Europe and boost global growth.

   

Also on April 19, the Secretary will attend the spring meetings of the IMF and the World Bank.  As well as reviewing the global economic outlook, the meetings will also discuss challenges facing developing and emerging economies, and other development challenges including issues of gender inclusiveness. Later that day, Secretary Lew will hold a press conference.Also on April 19, Secretary Lew will participate in a meeting of Finance Ministers of the Deauville Partnership.



Additional details on the Secretary’s schedule for the week will be announced in the days ahead.



**Press Logistics:**



**Wednesday, April 17**



**4:00 PM EDT**



SECRETARY LEW DELIVERS REMARKS AND PARTICIPATES IN A CONVERSATION ON THE STATE OF THE GLOBAL ECONOMY WITH WALL STREET JOURNAL ECONOMICS EDITOR DAVID WESSEL



Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS)



1740 Massachusetts Avenue, NW



Washington, DC



This event is open press. Interested media must RSVP to Felicia Neuringer Klubes at[fklubes@jhu.edu](mailto:fklubes@jhu.edu). Press with camera equipment must arrive no later than 3:00 p.m. All other press must arrive by 3:30 p.m.



**Thursday, April 18**



**11:00 AM EDT**



SECRETARY LEW DELIVERS BRIEF REMARKS AT THE MEETING OF THE EQUAL FUTURES PARTNERSHIP



World Bank



Room MC 13-121



1818 H Street



Washington, DC



This event is open press. Interested media should contact Maura Leary at[mleary@worldbank.org](mailto:mleary@worldbank.org).



**Friday, April 19**



**5:15 PM EDT**



SECRETARY LEW HOLDS A PRESS CONFERENCE



IMF HQ1



Red Level Auditorium



700 19TH Street, NW



Washington, DC



This event is open press. NOTE: This photo spray is open only to press who have obtained press credentials for the 2013 Spring Meetings.  Media who wish to attend must RSVP to Stephanie Ma at[Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov](mailto:Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov)by Thursday, April 18 at 4:00 PM. Press with camera equipment must arrive no later than 4:30 PM. All other press must arrive no later than 5:00 PM.

   

###
