---
title: Secretary Lew to Visit Egypt, Tanzania, South Africa, October 27-30
date: 2014-10-23
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/102314
---

*(Archived Content)*



**WASHINGTON –**The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will visit Cairo, Egypt; Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, and Johannesburg, South Africa for meetings on October 27–30, 2014 with senior government officials and business leaders to discuss the state of the global economy and policies to promote regional growth and investment, including President Obama's Power Africa initiative.



The Secretary will depart Washington, D.C. on October 25 for Cairo.  He will visit Dar es Salaam on October 28 and Johannesburg and Pretoria on October 29-30 before returning to Washington on October 31.



On Monday, October 27, Secretary Lew will be in Cairo, Egypt. The Secretary will meet with Egyptian Finance Minister Hany Dimian and Central Bank Governor Hisham Ramez. While in Cairo, Secretary Lew will also meet with young Egyptian entrepreneurs.



On Tuesday, October 28, Secretary Lew will be in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. The Secretary will meet with Tanzanian Finance Minister Saada Mkuya Salum. Additionally, Secretary Lew will meet with a diverse group of business leaders for a roundtable discussion on the state of the global and regional economy, hosted by the American Chamber of Commerce in Tanzania.  These meetings are closed press.



On Wednesday, October 29, the Secretary will be in Johannesburg, South Africa.  The Secretary will meet with business leaders to discuss investment and economic growth in South Africa, including power sector financiers and investors engaged with President Obama’s Power Africa initiative.



On Thursday, October 30 in Pretoria, South Africa, Secretary Lew will meet with South African Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene.



Additional details regarding Secretary Lew’s schedule and press opportunities will be made available over the coming days.



**PRESS OPPORTUNITIES:**



**Monday, October 27**



**9:30 AM (local time)**



SECRETARY LEW MEETS WITH EGYPTIAN FINANCE MINISTER HANY DIMIANFinance MinistryCairo, Egypt



There will be a photo spray at the top of this meeting. For additional information, please contact Mofid Deak at[Deakmh@state.gov](mailto:Deakmh@state.gov).



**Thursday, October 30**



**1:00 PM (local time)**



SECRETARY LEW MEETS WITH SOUTH AFRICAN FINANCE MINISTER NHLANHLA NENE



National TreasuryPretoria, South Africa



There will be a photo spray at the top of this meeting. For additional information, please contact Camille Dawson at[DawsonCP@state.gov](mailto:DawsonCP@state.gov).



###​
