---
title: 'Wednesday: Secretary Lew to Deliver Remarks, Recognize Multilateral Development Banks'
date: 2014-07-21
draft: false
press_release_number: JL07212014
url: /news/media-advisories/jl07212014
---

*(Archived Content)*

     **WASHINGTON –** At 9:00 AM EDT on Wednesday, July 23, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will deliver remarks at this year’s Development Impact Honors recognizing outstanding projects undertaken by the Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs). The event will bring senior leaders of MDBs, members of the development community, and senior government officials together to recognize and promote excellence in reducing poverty and promoting development. 

Secretary Lew’s remarks will be followed by a panel discussion with award recipients and senior leaders of the international financial institutions. **WHO:**            Secretary Jacob J. Lew  Assistant Secretary for International Markets and Development Marisa      Lago **WHAT:**Third Annual Development Impact Honors    **WHEN:**Wednesday, July 23, 2014 9:00 AM EDT    **WHERE:        **U.S. Department of Treasury  1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  Cash Room  Washington, DC   This event is open press. There will also be a live webcast at [https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts](http://links.govdelivery.com/track?type=click&enid=ZWFzPTEmbWFpbGluZ2lkPTIwMTQwNzIxLjM0Mjg0MTAxJm1lc3NhZ2VpZD1NREItUFJELUJVTC0yMDE0MDcyMS4zNDI4NDEwMSZkYXRhYmFzZWlkPTEwMDEmc2VyaWFsPTE2OTIwODI5JmVtYWlsaWQ9c2FyYWgubG9nYW5AdHJlYXN1cnkuZ292JnVzZXJpZD1zYXJhaC5sb2dhbkB0cmVhc3VyeS5nb3YmZmw9JmV4dHJhPU11bHRpdmFyaWF0ZUlkPSYmJg==&&&100&&&/news/webcasts). Members of the media who wish to attend **must RSVP by 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday, July 22 **to Ronda Buckmon at [Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov](mailto:Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov). Members of the media who are not credentialed with the U.S. Department of the Treasury must provide Ms. Buckmon with the following information for access into the building: full legal name, date of birth, Social Security number and country of citizenship.   **PLEASE NOTE** Press with camera equipment should arrive at the Alexander Hamilton entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) **NO LATER THAN 7:30 a.m. **to allow time for equipment sweeps. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in.   All other media must arrive by 8:30 a.m. at the main entrance on 15th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue.       ###
