---
title: U.S. Treasury Deputy Secretary Raskin to Attend APEC Finance Ministers Meeting, October 21-22, 2014
date: 2014-10-16
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/10162014
---

*(Archived Content)*

​**Trip to Highlight Boosting Regional Growth, Global Demand** **WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that Deputy Secretary Sarah Bloom Raskin will travel to Beijing, China next week for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Finance Ministers Meeting on October 21-22.  The Deputy Secretary will hold discussions with her counterparts about the U.S. and regional economic outlook, and policies to boost regional growth and global demand.  Deputy Secretary Raskin will also discuss efforts to level the playing field and create new opportunities for U.S. workers and businesses.   

On Wednesday, October 22, Deputy Secretary Raskin will participate in a joint press conference of APEC Finance Ministers.  Additional details and information about media opportunities will be announced in the coming days. On Thursday, October 23, the Deputy Secretary will attend the Asia Pacific Financial Forum (APFF). This conference is closed press.   Media planning to travel to Beijing for APEC may contact [holly.shulman@treasury.gov](mailto:holly.shulman@treasury.gov) for information about additional logistics. **Press logistics: ** **Wednesday, October 22, 2014 – 5:45 PM (Beijing) / 5:45 AM (Washington, DC)** DEPUTY SECRETARY RASKIN PARTICIPATES IN APEC FINANCE MINISTERS PRESS CONFERENCE Diaoyutai State Guesthouse Beijing, China This event is open press. For additional information, please contact [apecfmm2014media@163.com](mailto:apecfmm2014media@163.com). ###
