---
title: Daily Treasury Guidance for Saturday, November 15 - Sunday, November 16, 2014
date: 2014-11-16
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/11152014
---

*(Archived Content)*

​On Saturday and Sunday, Secretary Lew will be in Brisbane, Australia for the G-20 Leaders' Summit.

On Saturday morning, the Secretary met with Chinese Vice Premier Wang Yang. This meeting was closed press.

Also in the morning, the Secretary attended a G-20 working session for Finance Ministers. This meeting was closed press.

Later, Secretary Lew met with French Finance Minister Michael Sapin. This meeting was closed press.

In the afternoon, the Secretary will meet with Japanese Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Taro Aso. This meeting is closed press.

Also in the afternoon, Secretary Lew will attend a G-20 Welcome Ceremony and participate in a G-20 plenary session with President Obama. The Welcome Ceremony is closed press and the plenary session will have limited travel pool coverage.

Later, the Secretary will meet with European Commission Vice President Valdis Dombrovskis. This meeting is closed press. 

In the evening, Secretary Lew will attend a G-20 reception with the President at the Gallery of Modern Art. This event is closed press.

Also in the evening, the Secretary will participate in a working dinner of G-20 Finance Ministers hosted by Australian Treasurer Joe Hockey. This meeting is closed press.

The Secretary will remain overnight in Brisbane.

On Sunday morning, Secretary Lew will attend two G-20 plenary sessions with the President. These meetings are closed press.  

Later, the Secretary will attend a working lunch of G-20 Finance Ministers. This meeting is closed press.

In the evening, Secretary Lew will depart Brisbane en route to Washington. 
###
