---
title: "THURSDAY: Open Meeting of the President’s Advisory Council on Financial Capability for Young Americans"
date: 2014-09-30
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/09302014
---
*(Archived Content)*
​****MEDIA ADVISORY**** ** ****WASHINGTON –** On Thursday, October 2, 2014, the U.S. Department of the Treasury will host an open meeting of the President’s Advisory Council on Financial Capability for Young Americans (Council). Deputy Secretary Sarah Bloom Raskin will deliver opening remarks, and Secretary Jacob J. Lew will participate in discussions on the importance of financial capability and the Administration’s continued efforts to create a fair and sound financial system while empowering consumers with the tools they need to make informed decisions in the financial marketplace. U.S. Department of Education Secretary Arne Duncan and Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Director Richard Corday will also attend.   At this meeting, Treasury will announce recently awarded research contracts that will develop, test, and evaluate innovative approaches for providing financial services and products under its Financial Empowerment Innovation Fund. The Council will discuss how this research can help identify ways to build financial knowledge, skills and opportunities for young people and inform future ideas for the Council.  The Council will also receive updates from its subcommittees. **WHAT**:  Open Meeting of the President’s Advisory Council on Financial Capability for Young Americans **WHO**:              Jacob J. Lew, Secretary, U.S. Treasury Department Sarah Bloom Raskin, Deputy Secretary, U.S. Treasury Department Arne Duncan, Secretary, U.S. Department of Education Richard Cordray, Director, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Amias Gerety, Acting Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions, U.S. Treasury Department John W. Rogers, Jr., Council Chair  [Additional members of the Council](http://links.govdelivery.com/track?type=click&enid=ZWFzPTEmbWFpbGluZ2lkPTIwMTQwOTI5LjM2NDgyMjcxJm1lc3NhZ2VpZD1NREItUFJELUJVTC0yMDE0MDkyOS4zNjQ4MjI3MSZkYXRhYmFzZWlkPTEwMDEmc2VyaWFsPTE2OTYzNTYxJmVtYWlsaWQ9c3RlcGhhbmllLm1hQHRyZWFzdXJ5LmdvdiZ1c2VyaWQ9c3RlcGhhbmllLm1hQHRyZWFzdXJ5LmdvdiZmbD0mZXh0cmE9TXVsdGl2YXJpYXRlSWQ9JiYm&&&100&&&http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education/Documents/Council%20Members%20as%20of%209%201%2014.pdf)      **WHEN**:           Wednesday, October 2, 2014  Event start time: 9:00 a.m. EDT  **WHERE**:         U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, D.C.  **RSVP**:    Media planning to attend must RSVP by 10:00 a.m. on Wednesday, October 1 to Ronda Buckmon at [Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov](mailto:Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov).   Media without press credentials issued by Treasury must include the following information for access into the building: (1) full legal name, (2) date of birth, (3) Social Security number, and (4) country of citizenship.  Media attending with camera equipment must arrive at the South Entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) no later than 7:30 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by 8:30 a.m. at the main entrance (Pennsylvania Avenue/New York Avenue and 15th Street). A live webcast will be available at [http://www.treasury.gov/presscenter/Video-Audio Webcasts/Pages/Webcasts.aspx](http://links.govdelivery.com/track?type=click&enid=ZWFzPTEmbWFpbGluZ2lkPTIwMTQwOTI5LjM2NDgyMjcxJm1lc3NhZ2VpZD1NREItUFJELUJVTC0yMDE0MDkyOS4zNjQ4MjI3MSZkYXRhYmFzZWlkPTEwMDEmc2VyaWFsPTE2OTYzNTYxJmVtYWlsaWQ9c3RlcGhhbmllLm1hQHRyZWFzdXJ5LmdvdiZ1c2VyaWQ9c3RlcGhhbmllLm1hQHRyZWFzdXJ5LmdvdiZmbD0mZXh0cmE9TXVsdGl2YXJpYXRlSWQ9JiYm&&&101&&&http://www.treasury.gov/presscenter/Video-Audio%20Webcasts/Pages/Webcasts.aspx). ###