---
title: "November 5: Opening Meeting of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC)"
date: 2014-10-31
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/10312014
---
*(Archived Content)*

 
 
 
**WASHINGTON **– On Wednesday, November 5, 2014, the U.S. Treasury Department will host a public meeting of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission. Acting Under Secretary for Domestic Finance Matthew Rutherford will deliver opening remarks on how the federal government and the private sector are providing tools and services to enhance financial literacy among more Americans. Additional speakers include Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Director Richard Cordray, Department of Labor Assistant Secretary for Employment and Training Portia Wu, and Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board Executive Director Greg Long.
 
 
 
The agenda for this meeting will focus on financial education for federal employees, recent research by federal agencies, and research by the Federal Reserve on issues ranging from household economics, homeownership counseling, and financial management skills.
 
 
 
**WHAT**:Financial Literacy and Education Commission Public Meeting 
 
 
 
**WHO**:            
 
 
 
Matthew Rutherford, Acting Under Secretary for Domestic Finance, U.S. Treasury Department
 
 
 
Richard Cordray, Director, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
 
 
 
Portia Wu, Assistant Secretary of Labor for Employment and Training, U.S. Department of Labor
 
 
 
Greg Long, Executive Director, Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board
 
Amias Gerety, Counselor, U.S. Treasury Department
 
 
 
 
 
Additional members of the Commission            ​
 
**WHEN**:          Wednesday, November 5, 2014
 
 
 
  9:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. ET
 
 
 
**WHERE**:       U.S. Department of the Treasury
 
 
 
  Cash Room
 
 
 
 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
 
 
 
 Washington, DC 20220
 
 
 
 
 
**RSVP**:  Media planning to attend must RSVP by 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday, November 4th to Ronda Buckmon at [Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov](mailto:Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov).  
 
 
 
Me
 
dia without press credentials issued by Treasury must include the following information for access into the building: (1) full legal name, (2) date of birth, (3) Social Security number, and (4) country of citizenship. 
 
 
 
Media attending with camera equipment must arrive at the South Entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) no later than 7:30 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by 8:30 a.m. at the main entrance (Pennsylvania Avenue/New York Avenue and 15th Street).
 
 
 
 
 
A live webcast will be available at [http://www.home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts](https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts).
 
 
 
 
 
###​
 ​