---
title: "Secretary Lew, Senior Treasury Officials to Attend IMF, World Bank Annual Meetings and G-20 Meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors"
date: 2014-10-06
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/10062014.1
---
*(Archived Content)*
​**WASHINGTON **– Secretary Jacob J. Lew and Treasury officials will attend the fall meetings of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank, and the G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting in Washington, October 8-12, 2014.    On October 7, Secretary Lew will participate in a moderated conversation on the state of the global economy ahead of the annual meetings at the Peter G. Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington. This event is open press.  On October 8, Secretary Lew will attend the 6th Meeting of Finance Ministers of the Americas and the Caribbean hosted at the Inter-American Development (IDB) Bank. Later that day, the Secretary will attend a meeting of the Pacific Alliance. There will be a photo spray at the top of both of these meetings. Also on October 8, the Secretary will meet with Mexican Finance Minister Luis Videgaray at Treasury. This meeting is closed press. On October 9, Deputy Secretary Raskin will participate in a meeting of Finance Ministers of the Deauville Partnership with Arab Countries in Transition. Later that evening, the Deputy Secretary will participate in the working dinner of G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors. These meetings are closed press. On October 10, Deputy Secretary Raskin will meet with Pakistani Finance Minister Mohammed Ishaq Dar. This meeting is closed press. On October 12, Secretary Lew will attend the ASEAN Ministers Meeting. There will be a photo spray at the top of this meeting.  In the afternoon, the Secretary will meet with United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne. This meeting is closed press.  Information on additional press opportunities will be made available in the coming days. **Press Logistics:** **Tuesday, October 7** **8:30 AM EDT** **Secretary Jacob J. Lew** **Moderated Conversation on the State of the Global Economy with Vikas Bajaj of The New York Times** **Peter G. Peterson Institute for International Economics** **1750 Massachusetts Avenue, NW** **Washington, DC** This event is open press. A live webcast will also be available at [www.iie.com](http://links.govdelivery.com/track?type=click&enid=ZWFzPTEmbWFpbGluZ2lkPTIwMTQxMDA2LjM2NzIyMjQxJm1lc3NhZ2VpZD1NREItUFJELUJVTC0yMDE0MTAwNi4zNjcyMjI0MSZkYXRhYmFzZWlkPTEwMDEmc2VyaWFsPTE2OTY3MzU2JmVtYWlsaWQ9c3RlcGhhbmllLm1hQHRyZWFzdXJ5LmdvdiZ1c2VyaWQ9c3RlcGhhbmllLm1hQHRyZWFzdXJ5LmdvdiZmbD0mZXh0cmE9TXVsdGl2YXJpYXRlSWQ9JiYm&&&100&&&http://www.iie.com). For additional information, please contact Brian Reil at [media@piie.com](mailto:media@piie.com).  **Note: For the following events, all press must be credentialed for the 2014 Annual Meetings.** **Wednesday, October 8** **9:00 AM EDT** **Secretary Jacob J. Lew** **Participation in **6th Meeting of Finance Ministers of the Americas and the Caribbean hosted at the Inter-American Development (IDB) Bank Inter-American Development (IDB) Bank Andres Bello Auditorium, 9th Floor 1300 New York Avenue, NW Washington, DC **There will be a photo spray at the top of this meeting. For additional information please contact Carolina Osorio at [cosorio@iadb.org](mailto:cosorio@iadb.org) or (202) 623-1186, or Mildred Rivera at [mildredr@iadb.org](mailto:mildredr@iadb.org) or (202) 623-2319.   **1:30 PM EDT** Secretary Jacob J. Lew Participation in a Meeting of the Pacific Alliance U.S. Department of the Treasury Diplomatic Reception Room Washington, DC There will be a photo spray at the top of this meeting. Cameras interested in covering must email Ronda Buckmon at [Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov](mailto:Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov) with the following information: full legal name, Social Security number, date of birth, and country of citizenship. The deadline to RSVP is MONDAY, October 6 at 4:00 p.m. Press should arrive at the South Entrance (on 15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Avenue) at 12:00 p.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in.   **Sunday, October 12** **12:00 PM EDT** Secretary Jacob J. Lew Participation in ASEAN Ministers Meeting The World Bank East Dining Room 1818 H Street NW Washington, DC There will be a photo spray at the top of this meeting. For additional information, please contact Frederick Jones at [fjones@worldbank.org](mailto:fjones@worldbank.org). ###​​