---
title: "WEDNESDAY: Open Meeting of The Financial Literacy and Education Commission"
date: 2015-02-19
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/02192015
---
*(Archived Content)*
​**WASHINGTON** – On Wednesday, February 25, 2015, the U.S. Treasury Department will host a public meeting of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC).  Counselor to the Secretary Amias Gerety will deliver opening remarks on youth savings.  Additional speakers include Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Director Richard Cordray and Comptroller of the Currency Thomas Curry. The FLEC is chaired by the U.S. Treasury Department and comprised of 22 federal entities. Its mission is to promote the financial literacy of the American people. The agenda for this meeting will focus on youth savings programs and will feature panel discussions on how financial institutions are working with schools to increase financial capability and the value of hands-on learning through youth savings. The meeting takes place during America Saves Week, which is an annual opportunity for organizations to promote good savings behavior and a chance for individuals to assess their own saving status. **WHAT:**Financial Literacy and Education Commission Public Meeting  **WHO:   **Amias Gerety, Counselor to the Secretary, U.S. Treasury Department Richard Cordray, Director, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Thomas Curry, Comptroller of the Currency   Additional members of the Commission            **WHEN:**Wednesday, February 25, 2015 9:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. ET **WHERE:**       U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, DC 20220 **RSVP:**  Media planning to attend must **RSVP by 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday, February 24 to Ronda Buckmon at **[**ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov**](mailto:ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov)**.** Media without press credentials issued by Treasury must include the following information for access into the building: (1) full legal name, (2) date of birth, (3) Social Security number, and (4) country of citizenship.  Media attending with camera equipment must arrive at the South Entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) no later than 7:30 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds, and equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by 8:30 a.m. at the main entrance (Pennsylvania Avenue/New York Avenue and 15th Street).    A live webcast will be available at [https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts](https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts) ###