---
title: "Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew Travels to Addis Ababa"
date: 2015-07-12
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/07122015
---
*(Archived Content)*
 **WASHINGTON –** Secretary of the Treasury Jacob J. Lew will lead the U.S. Delegation to the Third International Conference on Financing for Development from July 13-15, 2015 in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. The Financing for Development Conference will bring together world leaders, Finance and Foreign Ministers, private sector representatives, and non-governmental organizations to lay out a policy framework that will help countries to identify, attract, and access diverse sources of finance in support of sustainable development.For more information, please visit: [http://www.un.org/esa/ffd/ffd3/index.html](http://links.govdelivery.com/track?type=click&enid=ZWFzPTEmbWFpbGluZ2lkPTIwMTUwNzAyLjQ2NzM4MDUxJm1lc3NhZ2VpZD1NREItUFJELUJVTC0yMDE1MDcwMi40NjczODA1MSZkYXRhYmFzZWlkPTEwMDEmc2VyaWFsPTE3MTUyNDQ5JmVtYWlsaWQ9d2hpdG5leS5zbWl0aEB0cmVhc3VyeS5nb3YmdXNlcmlkPXdoaXRuZXkuc21pdGhAdHJlYXN1cnkuZ292JmZsPSZleHRyYT1NdWx0aXZhcmlhdGVJZD0mJiY=&&&100&&&http://www.un.org/esa/ffd/ffd3/index.html). **The full details on Secretary Lew’s schedule are below:****        **   **Tuesday, July 14, 2015** **10:00**** am ****          Financing for Development Plenary Session**     United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) Conference Center, Conference Room 1 Menelik II Ave. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia   This event is open to Financing for Development credentialed media. **11:30 am         ****  International Business Forum**    Hilton Addis Ababa Lobby Level, Ballroom 1 and 2 Menelik II Ave. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia      This event is open to Financing for Development credentialed media. **** **3:30 pm  ****Domestic Revenue Mobilization: Realizing the Potential**     Elilly Hotel Green Hall, 1st Floor Guinea Conakry St. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia     This event is open to Financing for Development credentialed media. **6:30 pm  Power Africa Event **     Hilton Addis Ababa Lobby Level, Ballroom 1 and 2 Menelik II Ave. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia      *This event is open to Financing for Development credentialed media.*   **Wednesday, July 15, 2015**   **8:15 am   Harnessing the Data Revolution for Sustainable Development **     Hilton Addis Ababa Lobby Level, Ballroom 2 Menelik II Ave. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia      *This event is open to Financing for Development credentialed media.*   # # #