---
title: "Wednesday: Open Meeting Of The Financial Literacy And Education Commission"
date: 2015-11-13
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/11132015
---
*(Archived Content)*
**** ** WASHINGTON **– On Wednesday, November 18, 2015, the U.S. Treasury Department will host a public meeting of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC).  Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will deliver opening remarks. Additional speakers include Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Director Richard Cordray and Acting Commissioner of Social Security Carolyn W. Colvin.  The agenda for this meeting will focus on focus on how to prepare more Americans to plan and take action for long-term financial goals such as retirement. Additionally, there will be a presentation on Treasury’s myRA -- a simple, safe, and affordable starter retirement savings option for workers who don't have access to a plan at work. myRA has no fees, no risk of losing money and no minimum balance or contribution requirements. The program is designed to remove common barriers to saving, and give people an easy way to get started saving for retirement. The FLEC is chaired by the U.S. Treasury Department and comprised of 22 federal entities. Its mission is to promote the financial literacy of the American people.  **WHO**:            Jacob J. Lew, Secretary, U.S. Treasury Department Richard Cordray, Director, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Carolyn W. Colvin, Acting Commissioner of Social Security **WHAT**:        Financial Literacy and Education Commission Public Meeting  **WHEN**:        Wednesday, November 18, 2015 9:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. EDT **WHERE**:       U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW Washington, DC 20220 **RSVP**:            Media planning to attend must RSVP by 3:30 p.m. on Tuesday, November 17 to Ronda Buckmon at ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov.    Media without press credentials issued by Treasury must include the following information for access into the building: (1) full legal name, (2) date of birth, (3) Social Security number, and (4) country of citizenship. Media attending with camera equipment must arrive at the South Entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) no later than 7:45 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds, and equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by 8:30 a.m. at the main entrance (Pennsylvania Avenue/New York Avenue and 15th Street).   A live webcast will be available at /news/webcasts ###