---
title: Financial Stability Oversight Council To Meet November 2
date: 2015-10-26
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/10262015a
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON**– On Monday, November 2, Secretary Lew will preside over a meeting of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (Council) at the Treasury Department.  The agenda will include both an executive and an open session.  The preliminary agenda for the open session includes an update regarding the Council’s ongoing work on asset management and an update regarding Council member agencies’ work related to cybersecurity.



Additional information on the executive session for this meeting and Council meetings in general is available at:[https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-markets-financial-institutions-and-fiscal-service/fsoc/council-meetings](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-markets-financial-institutions-and-fiscal-service/fsoc/council-meetings).



**WHO:**



**Jacob J. Lew**, Secretary of the Department of the Treasury                       (Chairperson of the Council)



**Janet L. Yellen**, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve             System



**Thomas Curry**, Comptroller of the Currency



**Richard Cordray**, Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau



**Mary Jo White**, Chair of the Securities and Exchange Commission



**Martin J. Gruenberg**, Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance                       Corporation



**Timothy G. Massad**, Chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading                     Commission



**Melvin L. Watt**, Director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency



**Debbie Matz**, Chairman of the National Credit Union Administration



**S. Roy Woodall, Jr**., Independent Member with Insurance Expertise



**Richard Berner**, Director of the Office of Financial Research (non-                     voting member)



**Michael T. McRaith**, Director of the Federal Insurance Office (non-                     voting member)



**Adam Hamm**, Commissioner, North Dakota Insurance Department                   (non-voting member)



**John Ducrest**, Commissioner, Louisiana Office of Financial Institutions             (non-voting member)



**Melanie Lubin**, Securities Commissioner, Maryland Office of the Attorney General, Securities Division (non-voting member)




**WHEN**:



Monday, November 2, 2015



2:00 PM EDT



**WHERE**:



U.S. Department of the Treasury



Cash Room



1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW



Washington, D.C.



**RSVP:  **



This event is open to the press. A live webcast of the open session will also be available at[https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts](https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts).



Media planning to attend must RSVP to Ronda Buckmon at[Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov](mailto:Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov). Media without Treasury press credentials must include the following information: full legal name, Social Security number, date of birth, and country of citizenship.  The deadline to RSVP is Friday, October 30 at 12:00 p.m.



Media attending with camera equipment must arrive at the South entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) at 12:15 p.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up.  Late arrivals will not be granted entrance.  No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in.  All other media should arrive by 1:30 p.m. at the North entrance (15th Street and New York Avenue).



###

​​
