---
title: Financial Stability Oversight Council to Meet May 19
date: 2015-05-12
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/05122015c
---

*(Archived Content)*

   WASHINGTON – On Tuesday, May 19, Secretary Lew will preside over a meeting of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (Council) at the Treasury Department.  The agenda will include both an executive and an open session.  The preliminary agenda for the open session includes a discussion of the Council’s 2015 annual report and a discussion of charters for the Council’s committees. Additional information on the executive session for this meeting and past Council meetings is available at: https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-markets-financial-institutions-and-fiscal-service/fsoc/council-meetings.  WHO: •         Jacob J. Lew, Secretary of the Department of the Treasury (Chairperson of the Council) •         Janet L. Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System •         Thomas Curry, Comptroller of the Currency •         Richard Cordray, Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau •         Mary Jo White, Chair of the Securities and Exchange Commission •         Martin J. Gruenberg, Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation •         Timothy G. Massad, Chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission •         Melvin L. Watt, Director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency •         Debbie Matz, Chairman of the National Credit Union Administration •         S. Roy Woodall, Jr., Independent Member with Insurance Expertise •         Richard Berner, Director of the Office of Financial Research (non-voting member) •         Michael T. McRaith, Director of the Federal Insurance Office (non-voting member) •         Adam Hamm, Commissioner, North Dakota Insurance Department (non-voting member) •         John Ducrest, Commissioner, Louisiana Office of Financial Institutions (non-voting member) •         David Massey, Deputy Securities Administrator, North Carolina Department of the Secretary of State, Securities Division (non-voting member) WHEN: Tuesday, May 19, 2015 2:30 PM EDT WHERE: U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, DC This event is open to the press. A live webcast of the open session will be available at /news/webcasts. Media without Treasury press credentials planning to attend must email Ronda Buckmon at Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov with the following information: full legal name, Social Security number, date of birth, and country of citizenship.  The deadline to RSVP is Monday, May 18, 12:00 PM.   Media attending with camera equipment should arrive at the South Entrance (on 15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) at 1:00 p.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by 2:15 p.m. at the North entrance (Pennsylvania Avenue and 15th Street). ###​
