---
title: 'May 13: Secretary Lew to Visit Dallas, Texas'
date: 2015-05-08
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/05082015b
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON **– On Wednesday, May 13, 2015, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will be in Dallas, Texas to underscore the importance of enacting business tax reform that simplifies the tax code, makes U.S. businesses more competitive, and closes unfair and inefficient tax loopholes while encouraging job creation, funding long-term infrastructure investment, and expanding opportunities to build a strong middle class.  While in Dallas, the Secretary will also emphasize how the President’s trade agenda will enable the United States to overcome barriers to trade, help to level the playing field for U.S. firms, and support quality jobs for American workers. In the morning, the Secretary will visit Innovative Machine and Laser Company, a local small business manufacturer.  Innovative Machine and Laser Company is a 20,000 square foot advanced manufacturing facility that cuts, forms, welds, and finishes metals for a variety of industries, including telecommunications, energy, and infrastructure sectors. In the afternoon, the Secretary will participate in a moderated conversation hosted by the Dallas Regional Chamber of Commerce.  While in Dallas, Secretary Lew will also meet with local business leaders. **Press Logistics: ** **Wednesday, May 13 ** **1:45 PM CDT** SECRETARY LEW VISITS INNOVATIVE MACHINE AND LASER COMPANY Innovative Machine and Laser Company 3131 Winnequah Street Dallas, TX, 75212 There will be a b-roll opportunity of the Secretary’s tour for TV cameras and still photographers.  Media planning to attend must RSVP to Charles Nwaogu at Charles.Nwaogu2@treasury.gov by 9:00 a.m. on Wednesday, May 13.  Press call times and additional details are forthcoming.    **3:00 PM CDT  ** SECRETARY LEW PARTICIPANTS IN A MODERATED CONVERSATION HOSTED BY DALLAS REGIONAL CHAMBER Dallas Regional Chamber  500 N. Akard Street, Suite 2600 Dallas, TX, 765201 This event is open press.  For additional information, please contact Amy Ramos at aramos@dallaschamber.org ###
