---
title: "May 20: Treasury Hosts Community Development Advisory Board Public Meeting"
date: 2015-05-14
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/05142015
---
*(Archived Content)*
 WASHINGTON – On Wednesday, May 20, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will deliver opening remarks and swear-in new members at a public meeting of the Community Development Advisory Board (Advisory Board) at the Treasury Department.  The Advisory Board provides advice to the Director of Treasury’s Community Development Financial Institutions Fund (CDFI Fund) on the policies and activities of the CDFI Fund, which was created to promote economic development and revitalization in America’s underserved and distressed low-income communities. The program will include discussions on the direction of the CDFI Fund and presentations on recently published research on the CDFI Fund’s programs.   The agenda and a list of the CDFI Fund’s leadership and Advisory Board members are available at: http://www.cdfifund.gov/cdab. WHO:              Jacob J. Lew, Secretary of the Treasury Rosie Rios, Treasurer of the Unites States (Advisory Board member) Amias Gerety, Acting Assistant Secretary of Financial Institutions, Department of the Treasury Annie Donovan, Director, CDFI Fund, Department of the Treasury Community Development Advisory Board members WHEN:         Wednesday, May 20, 2015 9:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m. EDT WHERE:        U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, DC    RSVP:           Media planning to attend must RSVP by 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday, May 19 to Ronda Buckmon at Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov. Media without press credentials issued by Treasury must include the following information for access into the building: (1) full legal name, (2) date of birth, (3) Social Security number, and (4) country of citizenship.  Media attending with camera equipment must arrive at the South Entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) no later than 7:45 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds, and equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by 8:45 a.m. at the main entrance (Pennsylvania Avenue/New York Avenue and 15th Street). A live webcast will be available at /news/webcasts ### ​