---
title: Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew to Attend G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting and Spring Meetings of the IMF and World Bank
date: 2016-04-14
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/04142016
---

*(Archived Content)*

​**WASHINGTON **– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that Secretary Jacob J. Lew will attend the spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank in Washington, D.C. April 14-16, 2016.  Secretary Lew will also meet with G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors to discuss measures to promote global growth. On April 14, Secretary Lew will host the Sixth Annual U.S.-India Economic and Financial Partnership at the Treasury Department.  This dialogue is closed press.  Secretary Lew will also conduct bilateral meetings with Japanese Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Taro Aso, Chinese Finance Minister Lou Jiwei, and Iranian Central Bank Governor Valiollah Seif.  These meetings are closed press.  In the evening, Secretary Lew will attend a G-20 working dinner on Global Economy and Growth Framework.  This meeting is closed press.    On April 15, Secretary Lew will attend the Spring Meetings of the IMF and the World Bank.   The Secretary will conduct a multilateral meeting with Pacific Alliance Finance Ministers and a bilateral meeting with Mexican Secretary of Finance and Public Credit Luis Videgaray Caso.  These meetings are closed press.   Later in the morning, the Secretary will attend G-20 sessions on International Financial Architecture, Investment and Infrastructure, and Financial Sector Reform.  He will also conduct bilateral meetings with German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble and President of the Eurogroup Jeroen Dijsselbloem. These meetings are closed press.  In the afternoon, the Secretary will participate in the G-20 Family Photo.  Later in the afternoon, Secretary Lew will conduct bilateral meetings with Indonesian Finance Minister Bambang Brodjonegoro and Greek Finance Minister Euclid Tsakalotos.   In the evening, Secretary Lew will hold a press conference. Additional details on the Secretary’s bilateral schedule for the week will be announced in the days ahead. **Press Logistics:** **5:45 PM EDT** SECRETARY LEW PRESS CONFERENCE Jack Morton Auditorium School of Media and Public Affairs, The George Washington University 805 21st NW Washington, DC 20052 Media who wish to attend must RSVP to [Jamie.Obal@treasury.gov](mailto:Jamie.Obal@treasury.gov) by Friday, April 15 at 12:00pm EDT.  Additional details will be provided in the days ahead.
