---
title: 'Treasury to Host Freedman''s Bank Forum'
date: 2016-09-15
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/09152016
---

*(Archived Content)*

​ WASHINGTON – On Friday, September 23, 2016, the U.S. Treasury Department will host the Freedman's Bank Forum to explore ways to build an economy that works for all Americans. This Forum will bring together public, private, and nonprofit leaders to discuss strategies to improve jobs, economic opportunity, financial inclusion, and shared prosperity for all communities. The speakers and panelists will cover recent progress and new opportunities for the Obama Administration and private, non-profit, and local government sectors in fostering broad-based economic growth. They will also consider what more can be done on a variety of fronts to address economic disparities. This Forum's name is a tribute to the Freedman's Savings and Trust Company, which was created to provide economic opportunity for newly emancipated African-Americans more than 150 years ago, and which was commemorated by the Treasury Department earlier this year. The Freedman’s Bank Forum aligns with the historical significance of the bank and its original mission – to promote economic integration and financial inclusion. Additionally, the Forum coincides with a series of events throughout the Nation’s Capital that will mark the opening of the National Museum of African American History and Culture. **WHO**: Jacob J. Lew, Secretary, U.S. Treasury Department Sarah Bloom Raskin, Deputy Secretary, U.S. Treasury Department John Hope Bryant, Founder, Chairman, and CEO, Operation HOPE Raj Chetty, Professor of Economics, Stanford University Derek Dingle, Senior Vice President and Editor-In-Chief, Black Enterprise Magazine Curley M. Dossman, Jr., Chairman of the Board, 100 Black Men of America Sharon Epperson, CNBC Senior Personal Finance Correspondent Roger Ferguson, CEO, TIAA Kasim Reed, Mayor, City of Atlanta John Rogers, Chairman, CEO, and Chief Investment Officer, Ariel Investments Kim Saunders, President and CEO, Eads Group Andrew Young, former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Additional speakers and panelists representing private, non-profit, and government organizations **WHAT**:       Freedman's Bank Forum **WHEN**:       Friday, September 23, 2016 9:00 am - 12:30 pm EDT **WHERE**:      U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW Washington, DC 20220 **RSVP**:  Media planning to attend must RSVP by 3:30 p.m. EDT on Wednesday, September 21, 2016 to Margaret Mulkerrin at [Margaret.Mulkerrin@treasury.gov](mailto:Margaret.Mulkerrin@treasury.gov).  Media without press credentials issued by Treasury must include the following information for access into the building: (1) full legal name, (2) date of birth, (3) Social Security number, and (4) country of citizenship. Media attending with camera equipment must arrive at the South Entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) no later than 7:30 am EDT on September 23 to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds, and equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by 8:45 am EDT at the main entrance (Pennsylvania Avenue/New York Avenue and 15th Street). A live webcast will be available at [https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts](https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts) ###
