---
title: Advisory Committee on Risk-Sharing Mechanisms (ACRSM) to Meet February 16
date: 2016-02-11
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/02112016
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON **– On Tuesday, February 16, the Department of the Treasury’s Advisory Committee on Risk-Sharing Mechanisms (ACRSM) will convene for its first meeting.  During the meeting, the Committee will receive a presentation on the ethics guidelines for Committee Members, discuss the Members’ goals for the Committee, and hear about the current status of the implementation of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2015. ACRSM was established by the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2015 to provide advice and recommendations to the U.S. Department of the Treasury through the Federal Insurance Office (FIO) with respect to the creation and development of non-governmental, private market risk-sharing mechanisms for protection against losses arising from acts of terrorism.  FIO assists the Secretary with administration of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program (TRIP).  **WHO**: Advisory Committee on Risk-Sharing Mechanisms Federal Insurance Office **WHEN**: Tuesday, February 16 1:00 PM EDT **WHERE:** U.S. Department of the Treasury Media Room A 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, DC   This event is open press.  A live webcast of this meeting will be available at /news/webcasts.   All interested media must RSVP by 4:00 p.m. Friday, February 12 to Ronda Buckmon at Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov.  Media without press credentials issued by Treasury must provide Ms. Buckmon with the following information for access into the building: 1. full legal name, 2. date of birth, 3. Social Security number and 4. country of citizenship.  ###
