---
title: "Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew Travels to Seoul and Beijing"
date: 2016-05-30
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/05302016
---
*(Archived Content)*
 **WASHINGTON **– U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will travel to Seoul, Republic of Korea and Beijing, China from June 2-7, 2016. In Seoul, from June 2-4, Secretary Lew will meet with his Korean counterparts, including Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Yoo Il-ho, to discuss bilateral economic relations, measures to boost global economic growth, and efforts to target North Korea’s destabilizing behavior.  Secretary Lew will also meet with leaders from the business community. In Beijing, from June 5-7, Secretary Lew will participate in the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue. Secretary Lew and Secretary of State John Kerry, as President Obama’s Special Representatives, will be joined for the Dialogue by their respective Chinese co-chairs, Vice Premier Wang Yang and State Councilor Yang Jiechi, as President Xi’s Special Representatives, along with a U.S. delegation and their Chinese colleagues. The Dialogue will focus on the challenges and opportunities that both countries face on a wide range of bilateral, regional, and global areas of immediate and long-term economic and strategic interest. The schedule of press events will include but is not limited to an opening session on Monday, June 6 and a closing session on Tuesday, June 7. Further details regarding the agenda and additional press opportunities will be made available shortly.  Media planning to travel may contact Whitney Smith at whitney.smith@treasury.gov for information about logistics. # # #