---
title: "SCHEDULE OF PRESS EVENTS FOR THE G7 MINISTERIAL MEETINGS AMENDED"
date: 2025-12-23
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/js171
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS
 JS-171 
 
 
The following are the open press events of the G7 Ministerial meeting for planning purposes only. All members of the press who wish to cover the events will be issued a credential by Treasury Public Affairs. Please submit your name, social security # (passport # for non US citizens) date of birth and news affiliation to Frances Anderson at 202-622-2960 or e-mail to [frances.anderson@treasury.gov](mailto:frances.anderson@treasury.gov) by 3:00 pmWednesday, April 9, 2003.  Credentials will be distributed at the Pre - G7 Press Conference on Thursday, April 10, 2003.  
 
 
 
 
   
    **Thursday, April 10, 2003** 4:30 PM Pre - G7 Press Conference with Secretary Snow Department of Treasury Media Room 4121 Note: Press should arrive one hour prior of the Press conference Note: All camera crews must use the moat entrance to enter Main Treasury.   **Saturday, April 12, 2003** **8:00 AM** G7 Ministerial Arrivals and Meeting Photo Only (Meeting will be Pooled) Blair House Note: All press covering the arrival must enter at Jackson Place and H Street with a government issued ID by 7:00 AM to be swept and escorted to the press area. No one will be admitted after 7:00 AM.   **9:30 AM****  ** G7 Ministers “Family Photo” Photo Only Blair House   **12:00 PM****  ** Post G7 Press Conference with Secretary Snow Department of Treasury Media Room 4121 Note: Press should arrive one hour prior to the press conference. All camera crewsshould arrive through the north gate and Bell entrance of Main Treasury.