---
title: "MEDIA ADVISORY Secretary Snow to Visit Missouri on Thursday to Discuss U.S. Economy"
date: 2025-12-23
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/js1992
---
*(Archived Content)*
      
js-1992
 
Treasury Secretary John W. Snow will visit Independence , Missouri on Thursday, October 7 to meet with local business leaders and discuss the President's efforts to strengthen the economy and create jobs. 
 
"As a result of the President's economic leadership, we have overcome a recession and seen 12 straight months of job creation, totaling 1.7 million new U.S. jobs since August 2003," said Secretary Snow.  " Missouri has gained new jobs so far this year, and the President's tax reform policies have ensured that more than two million Missouri taxpayers will have lower income tax bills in 2004." 
 
During this trip to Missouri , Secretary Snow also will discuss the Administration's efforts to control health care costs, reduce frivolous lawsuits and ensure that America has reliable and affordable sources of energy.  "While the economy is on solid footing, we are not satisfied and there is still more work to be done.  We need to continue to push for pro-growth policies that will create jobs and raise standards of living," Secretary Snow said.  
 
Recent indicators show that President Bush's economic policies continue to move the economy forward.  According to the Labor Department, the national unemployment rate declined to 5.4% in August down 0.9 percentage point from a peak of 6.3% in June 2003 and the lowest rate since October 2001.  At 5.4%, the unemployment rate is below the average of the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s.  Employment over the last year was up in 47 of the 50 states and the unemployment rate was down in all regions and in 45 of the 50 states. 
 
 The following event is open to the media, which must present media credentials or photo ID: 
 
Thursday, October 7 
 
Roundtable with Local Business Leaders8:30 am CDTThe Independence Chamber210 West Truman RoadIndependence , MO** Media should arrive by 8:00 am 
 
Tour of Independence Center10:00 am CDTIndependence Center2035 Independence Center DriveIndependence , MO** media should gather at Main Entrance on 39 th St .** There will be a brief press availability immediately following the event 
 
-30-