---
title: "US Treasury To Visit San Francisco for Youth Financial Education Session"
date: 2025-12-23
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/js4208
---
*(Archived Content)*
 
JS-4208
 
 
 
U.S. Treasury Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. will visit San Francisco, California on Thursday, April 27 to discuss youth financial education with local Girls Scouts and the Charles Schwab Foundation.
 
Recent studies from the Charles Schwab Foundation show that while most American teens understand the basics of personal finance, they do not realize the consequences of poor money management. For example, 61 percent of teens surveyed say they know how to write a check, but only 41 percent know how to balance a checkbook. And while about one-third of teens owe money, only half say they are concerned about paying it back. Treasury Department officials are reaching out to youth across the country this month to help prevent the growth of problems like this in the next generation. 
 
Earlier this month Treasury Secretary John W. Snow and other members of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission released their strategy to improve financial literacy in America.  Their plan, titled Taking Ownership of the Future: The National Strategy for Financial Literacy, is available at [www.mymoney.gov](http://www.mymoney.gov). 
 
**Who:  **   Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr.
 
**What:**   Discussion on Youth Financial Education
 
**When:**  Thursday, April 27 10:00 a.m. (PDT)
 
**Where:  **        Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation25 Jessie Street at Ecker SquareSan Francisco, CA