---
title: "Secretary Snow Visits Philadelphia Friday"
date: 2025-12-23
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/js1879
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS
 
js-1879
 
 
 
U.S. Treasury Secretary John Snow will visit Philadelphia, Pennsylvania on Friday, September 3 to meet with local business leaders and discuss President Bush's efforts to strengthen the economy and create jobs. 
 
"More than 4.6 million taxpayers in Pennsylvania will have lower income tax bills in 2004 as a result of President Bush's economic policies.   There is no doubt that those policies are driving job growth in Pennsylvania and across the country," said Secretary Snow.
 
Recent economic reports indicate that the economy has turned around and job creation is on the rise.  According to the Labor Department, nationwide nearly 1.5 million jobs have been created since August 2003 according to the payroll survey; and 2.3 million jobs have been created since August 2003 according to the household survey.   The national unemployment rate declined to 5.5% in July – down 0.8 percentage points from a peak of 6.3% in June 2003 and the lowest rate since October 2001.  At 5.5%, the unemployment rate is below the average of the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s.  Job creation was up in 46 of the 50 states in the last year, and the unemployment rate was down in all regions and in 49 of the 50 states.
 
During his trip to Pennsylvania, Secretary Snow will also discuss the Bush Administration's efforts to control health care costs, reduce frivolous lawsuits and ensure that America has reliable and affordable sources of energy.  "While the economy is on solid footing, we are not satisfied and there is still more work to be done.  We must continue to push forward on a pro-growth economic agenda that meets the needs of the American people," Secretary Snow said.  
 
The following events are open to the press, which must present a media credential with photo identification to obtain admittance:
 
**Friday, September 3, 2004**
 
**9:30 am - 10:30 am****EVENT: Roundtable discussion with Secretary Snow and area builders and contractors**Southeast Pennsylvania Chapter of the Association of Builders and Contractors430 West Germantown PikeEast Norriton, PA  19403610-279-6666
 
**10:30 am - 11:00 am****EVENT: Press availability with Secretary Snow immediately following the roundtable discussion**