---
title: "Treasury Issues Proposed CFIUS Regulations; Lowery to Hold Briefing Today"
date: 2025-12-23
draft: false
url: /news/media-advisories/hp937
---
*(Archived Content)*
 
To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free [Adobe® Acrobat® Reader®](http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep.html). 
 
HP-937
 
 
 
Washington, D.C.--The Treasury Department today issued proposed regulations that implement the Foreign Investment and National Security Act of 2007 (FINSA).  The proposed regulations provide an update to regulations issued in 1991 that govern the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) and its process for national security review of certain foreign investments in U.S. businesses. They reflect reforms made to the CFIUS process by FINSA and the CFIUS executive order issued by President Bush on January 23 of this year.
 
"These regulations reflect America's strong and continued commitment to safeguarding U.S. national security in a manner that reinforces the longstanding U.S. policy of welcoming foreign investment.  The proposed regulations increase clarity and make additional improvements based on experience," said Assistant Secretary for International Affairs Clay Lowery.
 
The Treasury Department is requesting comments on the proposed regulations; a public comment period will extend for 45 days from publication later this week in the Federal Register. The Treasury Department will hold a public meeting to receive comments on the proposed regulations on May 2, 2008 in the Department's Cash Room. Further details on the meeting and submission of comments can be found in the opening pages of the [regulations](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/proposed_regulations42108.pdf). 
 
Assistant Secretary for International Affairs Clay Lowery will hold a briefing for media on the proposed regulations this afternoon.  
 
**Who  **Assistant Secretary for International Affairs Clay Lowery 
 
**What ** Pen-and-pad Briefing on Proposed CFIUS Regulations
 
**When  ** Monday, April 21, 3:00 p.m. EST 
 
**Where** U.S. Treasury Department1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW – Media Room (4121)Washington, D.C.  **Note** Media without Treasury press credentials should contact Frances Anderson at (202) 622-2439, or [frances.anderson@treasury.gov](mailto:frances.anderson@treasury.gov) with the following information: full name, Social Security number and date of birth. No cameras will be permitted into the briefing. 
 
**REPORTS** 
 
- [Proposed Regulations](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/proposed_regulations42108.pdf)