---
title: Swearing-in remarks as prepared for delivery of the 44th Treasurer of the United States Jovita Carranza
date: 2017-06-19T12:46:50-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0113
url: /news/press-releases/sm0113
---
It's an **honor** to have the opportunity to speak with you as part of my swearing in ceremony.  I would like to extend a special thank you for attending today's event—from Kentucky, Alabama, Wisconsin and Miami… But, today would not have been possible were it not for the **grace of God**.

In this room are a diverse group of nationally acclaimed stakeholders and constituents that **I'm proud and honored** to have worked and served with in the recent past.  You have become dear friends.  Also, my **daughter Klaudene** is here to share my most memorable moment.  Individuals in this room have in some special way enabled me to be here and for that I thank you deeply!

The individuals empowered to produce todays agenda are much appreciated and I thank you for making today a highlight for many of us here.

 

The Treasurer's mission is to maintain a **strong economy** and **create economic opportunities** by enabling **economic growth**.  As Treasurer, I'm responsible for advising the Secretary and Senior Staff on domestic economic sustainable prosperity imperatives.

I'm privileged to have a highly capable staff dedicated to **developing strategies** for improving financial capacity through product development design, as tools for educating individuals from youth to retirement on how to avoid debt and make wise investment decisions to contribute towards their sustainable prosperity, and thus resulting in a **stronger U.S. economy.**

You can trust that **President Trump**, **Secretary Mnuchin** and the entire Department of Treasury staff will work smart, long and hard at strengthening our countries' economy.

Again, I thank you!
