---
title: Joint Statement on Combatting Venezuelan Corruption
date: 2018-07-12
draft: false
press_release_number: SM428
url: /news/press-releases/sm428
---
The Minister of Finance and Public Credit of Colombia Mauricio Cardenas hosted a meeting with officials from Mexico, Panama, and the United States to share information on corrupt Venezuelan government officials and their support networks.  Participants agreed to expand international cooperation and information sharing on corrupt Venezuelan officials and their support networks.

Participants recognized the importance of international coordination to combat illicit finance networks that support President Maduro’s repressive regime.  The group noted that the regime is using food and humanitarian aid as a weapon for social control.  Furthermore, the Finance Ministries of the four countries condemned the large-scale theft of funds from the Venezuelan food aid program (CLAP) and shared financial intelligence on corruption networks that are profiting at the expense of the suffering Venezuelan people.  After several months of work together, multiple lines of investigation are underway, and the group decided to include additional countries to continue the process of joint investigation. The group reiterated its support for the Venezuelan people who deserve to have a voice in the future of their country.

This engagement builds on the high-level commitment from partners in the region to support the Venezuelan people and hold those responsible for the political, social, and economic crises accountable for their actions.
