---
title: Joint Statement on the EU-U.S. Joint Financial Regulatory Forum
date: 2025-12-15
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0336
url: /news/press-releases/sb0336
---
**WASHINGTON -**The EU-U.S. Joint Financial Regulatory Forum took place on 9-10 December 2025, with participants exchanging views on topics of mutual interest as part of their regular financial regulatory dialogue. The Forum was co-chaired by the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the European Commission, and was hosted by the Treasury in Washington DC.

U.S. participants included representatives from the U.S. Department of the Treasury, Federal Reserve Board (FRB), Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).

EU participants included representatives from the European Commission, European Central Bank (ECB), European Banking Authority (EBA), European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA), European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA), and Single Resolution Board (SRB).

The Forum emphasized close, ongoing U.S. and EU engagement in a range of areas and focused on six topics: (1) developing digital financial innovation; (2) achieving modernization/simplification of banking regulation and supervision; (3) revitalizing capital markets; (4) updating on the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA); (5) conveying U.S. G20 financial sector priorities; and (6) strengthening the European Savings and Investments Union and competitiveness.

Participants acknowledged the importance of the Forum in fostering ongoing financial regulatory dialogue between the United States and the European Union.  Both sides will continue to discuss the potential implications of respective policies and laws in each other’s jurisdictions, including extraterritorial concerns.  They further acknowledged that regular communication on regulatory and supervisory issues of mutual concern is important to support economic growth, financial stability, investor protection, market integrity, and a level playing field.

Participants look forward to the next Forum meeting expected to take place in mid-2026.
