---
title: Readouts from Secretary Mnuchin’s Bilateral Meetings in Saudi Arabia
date: 2017-10-25
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0189
url: /news/press-releases/sm0189
---
**Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s Meeting with Saudi Minister of Finance His Excellency Mohammed Al Jadaan and His Excellency Dr. Ahmed al-Kholifey, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority  Riyadh**– U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Saudi Finance Minister Mohammed Al Jadaan and Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority Governor Dr. Ahmed al-Kholifey. During their meeting, Secretary Mnuchin welcomed the partnership between the United States and Saudi Arabia on the Terrorist Financing Targeting Center (TFTC) and discussed initiatives to combat terrorism and illicit finance.   The Secretary also discussed economic developments in the Kingdom and expressed support for Saudi Arabian reforms under Vision 2030.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s Meeting with His Royal Highness Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia  Riyadh**– U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Royal Highness Mohammed bin Salman, Crown Prince, Deputy Premier, and Ministry of Defense of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Secretary Mnuchin expressed appreciation for Saudi Arabia hosting the Terrorist Finance Targeting Center (TFTC) and underscored the importance of Saudi leadership in countering illicit finance. The Secretary welcomed the close collaboration between the two countries in order to combat terrorist financing. The Secretary also commended Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman for leading the economic reforms as part of Vision 2030 to advance growth, opportunity and security in Saudi Arabia.
