---
title: Readouts from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s Meetings in Saudi Arabia on October 30, 2019
date: 2019-10-31T08:50:14-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM816
url: /news/press-releases/sm816
---
### Terrorist Financing Targeting Center Jointly Designates Network of Corporations, Banks, and Individuals Supporting IRGC and Hizballah

Riyadh – On October 30, the seven member nations of the Terrorist Financing Targeting Center jointly designated 25 targets affiliated with the Iranian regime’s terror-support networks in the region.  This is the TFTC’s largest joint designation to date, and is focused on entities supporting Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and Iran’s regional proxy, Hizballah.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Kuwaiti Minister of Finance His Excellency Dr. Nayef al-Hajraf

Riyadh – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Kuwaiti Minister of Finance His Excellency Dr. Nayef al-Hajraf on the sidelines of the Future Investment Initiative conference. During the meeting, they discussed bilateral economic cooperation and Secretary Mnuchin encouraged Kuwait’s further cooperation in combatting the financing of terrorism, both bilaterally and multilaterally through the Terrorist Financing Targeting Center. Secretary Mnuchin also received an update on efforts to strengthen Kuwait’s AML/CFT regime and economic measures to exert greater pressure on Iran.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Saudi Minister of Finance His Excellency Mohammed Al-Jadaan

Riyadh – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency, Saudi Minister of Finance, Mohammed Al-Jadaan, to discuss shared counterterrorism and illicit finance priorities. The Secretary expressed his appreciation for Saudi Arabia’s continued leadership of the Terrorist Finance Targeting Center and the Saudi government’s recent efforts to inform the private sector about the risks of fraudulent coin offerings and other digital asset activities in the Kingdom.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Dr. Ahmed al-Kholifey, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority

Riyadh – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency Dr. Ahmed al-Kholifey, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority. Secretary Mnuchin reaffirmed the importance of continued economic ties between the United States and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and discussed a range of topics of mutual concern including modernization of international taxation, debt transparency and sustainability, and virtual assets.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Saudi Arabian General Abdulaziz bin Mohammed al-Huwairini, Chief of the State Security, Director General for Investigations

Riyadh – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency, General Abdulaziz bin Mohammed al-Huwairini, Chief of the State Security and Director General for Investigations of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to discuss mutual national security concerns and efforts to combat terrorism and illicit finance. Secretary Mnuchin reiterated the United States’ support for Saudi Arabia following the Aramco attack and expressed his appreciation for its continued leadership of the Terrorist Finance Targeting Center.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Royal Highness Saudi Arabian Energy Minister Prince Abdulaziz bin Salman Al Saud

Riyadh – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Royal Highness Saudi Arabian Energy Minister Prince Abdulaziz bin Salman Al Saud. The Secretary and Minister discussed the meaningful bilateral relationship between the United States and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and updates associated with Vision 2030, including the National Industrial Development and Logistics Program. The Secretary and Minister also discussed their perspectives on global oil markets and major developments for Aramco.

####
