---
title: Readouts from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s Meetings in the United Arab Emirates on October 31, 2019
date: 2019-10-31T10:36:33-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM820
url: /news/press-releases/sm820
---
### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Highness Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi

Abu Dhabi – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Highness Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi. Secretary Mnuchin thanked the Crown Prince for his hospitality and reaffirmed the strong bilateral economic and security relationship between the two Nations. The Secretary and Crown Prince further discussed the ongoing collaboration between the United Arab Emirates and the United States in countering the financing of terrorism and the destabilizing influence of Iran.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with United Arab Emirates National Security Advisor, His Highness Sheikh Tahnoon bin Zayed Al Nahyan

Abu Dhabi – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with United Arab Emirates National Security Advisor, His Highness Sheikh Tahnoon bin Zayed Al Nahyan. Secretary Mnuchin expressed his appreciation for the partnership and ongoing collaboration between the United States and the United Arab Emirates in countering the financing of terrorism and other illicit activities, including through the Terrorist Financing Targeting Center.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Khalil Foulathi, Abu Dhabi Investment Authority Board Member and Advisor to the Managing Director

Abu Dhabi – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Abu Dhabi Investment Authority Board Member and Advisor to the Managing Director, His Excellency Khalil Foulathi. During the meeting they discussed their views on the regional and global economy as well as the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority’s investment priorities and recent projects.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with United Arab Emirates Minister of State for Financial Affairs, His Excellency Obaid Al Tayer, and Central Bank Governor, His Excellency, Mubarak Al Mansoori

Abu Dhabi – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with United Arab Emirates Minister of State for Financial Affairs, His Excellency Obaid Al Tayer, and Central Bank Governor, His Excellency, Mubarak Al Mansoori. During the meeting they discussed economic developments, national security and collaboration on illicit finance issues. Secretary Mnuchin expressed his appreciation for the United Arab Emirates’ continued support for the United States’ maximum pressure campaign against Iran and encouraged further cooperation in combatting the financing of terrorism.

####
