---
title: Readouts from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s Meetings in Israel on October 28, 2019
date: 2019-10-28T15:22:12-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM809
url: /news/press-releases/sm809
---
**Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with National Security Advisor of the State of Israel Meir Ben-Shabbat** Jerusalem – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin participated in a working lunch with Israeli National Security Advisor Meir Ben-Shabbat. They discussed efforts to combat terrorist financing and national security issues of mutual concern. **Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of the State of Israel** Jerusalem – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Secretary Mnuchin and Prime Minister Netanyahu reaffirmed the strong and enduring relationship between the United States and Israel and discussed topics of mutual concern including terrorist financing, economic cooperation and national security issues. **Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Bank of Israel Governor Amir Yaron** Jerusalem – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Bank of Israel Governor Amir Yaron. They discussed the Israeli economic outlook, AML/CFT priorities, issues associated with digital assets and fintech and other topics of mutual interest. **Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Finance Minister Moshe Kahlon of the State of Israel** Jerusalem – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Israeli Finance Minister Moshe Kahlon. Secretary Mnuchin and Minister Kahlon discussed the Israeli economy and national security issues including cooperative efforts to combat terrorist financing and enforce economic sanctions on Iran. **Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Minister of Foreign Affairs Yisrael Katz of the State of Israel** Jerusalem – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs Yisrael Katz. Secretary Mnuchin and Minister Katz discussed the important bilateral relationship between the United States and Israel and shared efforts to confront Iran’s dangerous and destabilizing activities and to disrupt financial networks that support the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and Iran’s terrorist proxies.

 

####
