---
title: Readouts from a Treasury Spokesperson of Secretary Mnuchin’s Bilateral Meetings at the World Bank and IMF Spring Meetings in Washington, DC
date: 2019-04-14
draft: false
press_release_number: SM656
url: /news/press-releases/sm656
---
**Brazilian Minister of the Economy Paulo Guedes**

U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Brazilian Minister of the Economy Paulo Guedes on Thursday. Secretary Mnuchin and Minister Guedes reaffirmed the importance of the U.S.-Brazil economic relationship and cooperation on regional security issues, as well as their shared commitment to implementing pro-growth economic reforms.***Italian Minister of Economy and Finance Giovanni Tria***

U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met Thursday with Italy’s Minister of Economy and Finance Giovanni Tria. The Secretary and Minister reaffirmed the continued significance of the longstanding relationship between the United States and Italy, and discussed the importance of strong economic and trade relations between the two nations. Secretary Mnuchin and Minister Tria also discussed ongoing security issues of mutual concern, foreign investment screening, Venezuela, and the need for consensus-based approaches to international tax.** Austrian Finance Minister Hartwig Löger**

U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met Friday with Hartwig Löger, Austria’s Minister of Finance. The Secretary and Minister reaffirmed the continued significance of the longstanding relationship between the United States and Austria, and discussed the importance of strong economic and trade relations between the two nations. Secretary Mnuchin and Minister Löger also discussed economic developments in the euro area and international tax issues.***United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer Philip Hammond***

U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met Friday with U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer Philip Hammond. Secretary Mnuchin and Chancellor Hammond reaffirmed the longstanding special relationship between the United States and United Kingdom, as well as the importance of free, fair, and reciprocal trade. The Secretary and Chancellor also discussed recent developments pertaining to Brexit, as well as recent security issues of mutual concern.*** 
Swiss President and Finance Minister Ueli Maurer***

U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met Saturday with Swiss President and Finance Minister Ueli Maurer. The Secretary and Minister reaffirmed the continued significance of the longstanding relationship between the United States and Switzerland, and discussed the importance of strong economic and trade relations between the two nations. Secretary Mnuchin and President Maurer also discussed ongoing security issues of mutual concern.

####
