---
title: Readouts from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s Meetings in Qatar on November 4, 2019
date: 2019-11-05
draft: false
press_release_number: SM826
url: /news/press-releases/sm826
---
### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Sheikh Abdulla bin Saoud Al Thani of Qatar

Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency Sheikh Abdulla bin Saoud Al Thani, Qatari Central Bank Governor. The Secretary reaffirmed the strong economic relationship between the U.S. and Qatar. Secretary Mnuchin discussed combating terrorist financing.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Mansour Ibrahim Al Mahmoud, Chief Executive Officer of Qatar Investment Authority

Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Mansour Ibrahim Al Mahmoud, Qatar Investment Authority Chief Executive Officer. The Secretary discussed the economic partnership between the U.S. and Qatar and reviewed the investment environment and their perspectives on economic issues.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Ali bin Fetais al-Marri of Qatar

Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Qatari Attorney General, His Excellency Ali bin Fetais al-Marri. The Secretary discussed combating terrorist financing along with other issues related to national security.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Her Excellency Sheikha Hind bint Hamad Al Thani of Qatar

Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Her Excellency Sheikha Hind bint Hamad Al Thani of Qatar, Vice Chairperson and Chief Executive Officer of the Qatar Foundation. The Secretary and Sheikha expressed their shared belief in the transformative power of education and discussed the Qatar Foundation’s work to support economic and social development through initiatives in education, science and research, and community development.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Ali Shareef al-Emadi of Qatar

Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Qatari Minister of Finance, His Excellency Ali Shareef al-Emadi. The Secretary reaffirmed the strong economic relationship between the U.S. and Qatar and discussed terrorism financing along with other issues of national security.

####
