---
title: Readouts from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s Meetings in Qatar on November 3, 2019
date: 2019-11-03
draft: false
press_release_number: SM823
url: /news/press-releases/sm823
---
### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Ali Shareef al-Emadi of Qatar

 

Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency Ali Shareef al-Emadi, Qatari Minister of Finance. The Secretary emphasized the strong bilateral relationship between the U.S. and Qatar. Secretary Mnuchin discussed efforts to counter terrorism financing along with other national security and economic issues of mutual concern.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Sheikh Abdullah bin Nasser bin Khalifa Al Thani, Amir of Qatar

Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met His Excellency Sheikh Abdullah bin Nasser bin Khalifa Al Thani, Prime Minister of Qatar. Secretary Mnuchin and the Prime Minister discussed collaborative efforts to counter terrorism finance networks and strengthen Qatar’s AML/CFT regime. The Secretary reaffirmed the important economic and security relationship between the U.S. and Qatar.

### Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani of Qatar

Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, Amir of Qatar. The Secretary highlighted the significant economic and security partnership between the U.S. and Qatar. Secretary Mnuchin and His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani discussed collaborative efforts to counter terrorist financing networks and strengthen Qatar’s AML/CFT regime and other national security issues.

####
