---
title: Readouts from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s Bilateral Meetings in Qatar on Tuesday, February 25 and Wednesday, February 26, 2020
date: 2020-02-26
draft: false
press_release_number: SM918
url: /news/press-releases/sm918
---
**Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Saad Al-Kaabi, Minister of State for Energy Affairs of Qatar** Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency Saad Al-Kaabi, Qatari Minister of State for Energy Affairs. The Secretary and Energy Minister visited the Ras Laffan Industrial City and discussed regional economic and energy issues, expansions plans, as well as Qatar energy investments in the United States.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Mansoor bin Ebrahim Al Mahmoud, Chief Executive Officer of Qatar Investment Authority** Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Mansoor bin Ebrahim Al Mahmoud, Chief Executive Officer of  Qatar Investment Authority. They discussed the global economy, market trends, and the Qatar Investment Authority’s investment outlook.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Sheikh Abdulla bin Saoud Al Thani, Qatar Central Bank Governor** Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency Sheikh Abdulla bin Saoud Al Thani, Qatar Central Bank Governor. They discussed AML/CFT efforts and the economic relationship between the United States and Qatar. They further discussed Qatar’s Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Mutual Evaluation which is currently underway.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Abdulla Mubarak al-Khalifa, Qatar National Bank CEO** Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Abdulla Mubarak al-Khalifa, Qatar National Bank CEO. The Secretary reaffirmed the United States’ commitment to combatting illicit finance through their AML/CFT efforts. They also discussed the regional economic outlook.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Dr. Khalid Bin Mohammed Al Attiyah, Minister of Defense of Qatar** Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency Dr. Khalid Bin Mohammed Al Attiyah, Qatari Minister of Defense. The Secretary reiterated the United States' commitment to combatting the financing of terrorism through AML/CFT efforts. They also discussed regional security issues.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Ali Shareef al-Emadi, Minister of Finance of Qatar** Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency Ali Shareef al-Emadi, Qatari Minister of Finance. They discussed the important economic relationship between the United States and Qatar, cooperation in combatting the financing of terrorism, and strengthening Qatar’s AML/CFT efforts.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al Thani, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Qatar** Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al Thani, Deputy Prime Minister, Foreign Minister, and Chairman of the Qatar Investment Authority. Secretary Mnuchin welcomed Qatar’s commitment to combatting the financing of terrorism and to taking steps to improve its AML/CFT regime through the passage of a new AML/CFT law. They also discussed Qatar’s regional issues and investment opportunities.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Excellency Sheikh Khalid bin Khalifa bin Abdulaziz Al Thani, Prime Minister and Minister of Interior of Qatar** Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency Sheikh Khalid bin Khalifa bin Abdulaziz Al Thani, Qatari Prime Minister and Minister of Interior. Secretary Mnuchin and the Prime Minister discussed regional economic and security issues including efforts to combat illicit finance and terrorism.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, Amir of Qatar** Doha – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, Amir of Qatar. The Secretary reaffirmed the important economic and security partnership between the United States and Qatar. They discussed regional economic developments and continued efforts to combat illicit finance in the region.

 

###
