---
title: Readouts from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s Bilateral Meetings in the UAE on Monday, February 24, 2020
date: 2020-02-25
draft: false
press_release_number: SM916
url: /news/press-releases/sm916
---
**Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with United Arab Emirates Minister of State for Financial Affairs, His Excellency Obaid Humaid Al Tayer, and Central Bank Governor, His Excellency Mubarak Al Mansoori**Abu Dhabi – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency Obaid Humaid Al Tayer, United Arab Emirates Minister of State for Financial Affairs, and His Excellency Mubarak Al Mansoori, Governor of the Central Bank of the UAE. They discussed the US-UAE economic relationship and global and regional economic outlook. They also discussed UAE’s efforts to strengthen its anti-money laundering regime and their recently completed Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Mutual Evaluation.**Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Abu Dhabi Investment Authority Managing Director, His Highness Hamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan**Abu Dhabi – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Highness Hamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Abu Dhabi Investment Authority Managing Director. His Highness Sheikh Hamed gave an update on Abu Dhabi Investment Authority’s investment priorities and recent projects and discussed opportunities to work with U.S. Treasury.**Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Khaldoon Al Mubarak, Mubadala Investment Company CEO and Managing Director**Abu Dhabi – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Khaldoon Al Mubarak, Mubadala Investment Company CEO and Managing Director. They discussed regional economic issues. Khaldoon Al Mubarak gave an update on Mubadala Investment Company's financial outlook.**Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with National Security Advisor of the United Arab Emirates, His Highness Tahnoun bin Zayed Al Nahyan**Abu Dhabi – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Highness Tahnoun bin Zayed Al Nahyan, National Security Advisor of the United Arab Emirates. Secretary Mnuchin expressed appreciation for the United Arab Emirates’ help in combatting the financing of terrorism and other illicit activities in the region. The Secretary and National Security Advisor also discussed regional security issues.

###
