---
title: Readouts from Secretary Mnuchin’s Bilateral Meetings on Saturday, February 22, 2020
date: 2020-02-23T11:49:21-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM914
url: /news/press-releases/sm914
---
**Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde** Riyadh – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with European Central Bank (ECB) President Christine Lagarde at the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting in Riyadh. Secretary Mnuchin and ECB President Lagarde reaffirmed the strength of the relationship between the United States and European Union and discussed the global economic outlook, the outlook for the European economy, and the ECB monetary policy strategy review.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Saudi Arabian Minister of Finance, His Excellency Mohammed Al-Jadaan** Riyadh – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency Mohammed al-Jadaan, Saudi Arabian Minister of Finance. Secretary Mnuchin thanked Minister Al-Jadaan for hosting the G20 Finance Ministerial meeting and expressed his appreciation for Saudi Arabia’s continued leadership of the Terrorist Finance Targeting Center. They also discussed ongoing efforts to combat terrorism and illicit finance, and to deliver progress on issues such as debt transparency and sustainability, and digital assets.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Canadian Minister of Finance Bill Morneau** Riyadh – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with Canadian Minister of Finance Bill Morneau and reaffirmed the strong economic and trade relationship between the United States and Canada. The Secretary and Minister discussed continued efforts to reach a multilateral agreement on international taxation, as well as the economic outlook, and security issues of mutual concern.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with French Finance Minister Bruno Le Maire** Riyadh – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with French Finance Minister Bruno Le Maire.  The Secretary and Minister continued discussions on the global economy, combating illicit financing, and international taxation and reaffirmed their commitment to the negotiations taking place at the OECD and achieving a consensus solution this year.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with International Monetary Fund Managing Director Dr. Kristalina Georgieva** Riyadh – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with International Monetary Fund Managing Director Dr. Kristalina Georgieva. They discussed the global economic outlook, including potential impacts of the coronavirus outbreak, and the importance of continued action to reduce debt vulnerabilities.** Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on Secretary Mnuchin’s meeting with Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority Governor, His Excellency Dr. Ahmed al-Kholifey** Riyadh – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin met with His Excellency Dr. Ahmed al-Kholifey, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority. Secretary Mnuchin reaffirmed the economic and security relationship between the United States and Saudi Arabia and expressed his support for Saudi Arabia’s G20 financial sector agenda. They discussed a range of topics including the Saudi Arabian economy, developments in financial technology, and shared counterterrorism and illicit finance priorities.

 

####
