---
title: 'READOUT: Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo’s Visit to the United Arab Emirates'
date: 2021-11-17
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy0490
---
ABU DHABI — Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo traveled to the United Arab Emirates from November 15 - 17 to discuss illicit finance, cybersecurity, the global economic recovery, and Iran. The U.S.-UAE bilateral relationship is critical given the important role the UAE plays in the region and globally, as well as the shared security concerns between the two countries on countering the financing of terrorism and money laundering.

In Dubai, the Deputy Secretary met with the economic leadership of the UAE, including H.H. Sheikh Maktoum bin Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, H.E. Mohamed Hadi al-Husseini, Minister of State for Financial Affairs, H.E. Khaled Balama al-Tameemi, Governor of the Central Bank of UAE, and H.E. Dr. Thani Ahmed al-Zeyoudi, Minister of State for Foreign Trade. Deputy Secretary Adeyemo later heard from the private sector at a roundtable with the UAE Banks Federation and toured Expo 2020 and the USA Pavilion. He also met with UAE Presidential Advisor Anwar Gargash.

In Abu Dhabi, the Deputy Secretary met with H.H. Sheikh Hamed bin Zayed al-Nahyan, Managing Director of Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (ADIA) and H.E. Abdullah Sultan al-Nuaimi, Minister of Justice.

Deputy Secretary Adeyemo welcomed the UAE’s improvements to their AML/CFT regime and encouraged continued progress. He discussed how our countries can promote more sustainable and equitable growth and deepen bilateral economic ties.
