---
title: 'READOUT: Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo’s Travel to New Delhi'
date: 2022-08-26
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy0930
---
NEW DELHI  —  On August 26, Deputy Secretary Wally Adeyemo met with government officials in New Delhi, India, including Minister of Finance Nirmala Sitharaman, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister PK Mishra, Ministry of Finance Secretary Ajay Seth, Ministry of External Affairs Secretary Vinay Kwatra, and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas Secretary Pankaj Jain.

During the Deputy Secretary’s meetings in New Delhi, he continued to underscore the importance of deepening the United States and India’s already strong relationship, including through platforms like the Quad and the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework. Deputy Secretary Adeyemo stressed that we can maintain a free and open Indo-Pacific that delivers greater prosperity for our citizens through those efforts, including through steps to bolster supply chain resiliency between trusted partners like the United States and India.

The Deputy Secretary also discussed ways that the United States and India could work together to address shared global challenges like food insecurity and high energy prices. The Deputy Secretary raised that ending Russia’s invasion of Ukraine was critical to addressing these issues.  The Deputy Secretary also shared with counterparts the United States’ views on ways to put downward pressure on energy prices for consumers and businesses in India, the United States, and globally. Deputy Secretary Adeyemo reiterated the importance of well supplied global energy markets, even as we work together with partners like India to expand access to sources of renewable energy that will reduce our dependence on fossil fuels over time.

Following his meetings in New Delhi, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will return to the United States.

###
