---
title: Treasury Department Announces Approval of Federal Funds to Help Construct New McCain Library in Arizona as Part of President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda
date: 2023-09-28
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1771
---
### Funded by the American Rescue Plan’s Capital Projects Fund, the McCain Library will provide education, work, and health screening programs to underserved communities

PHOENIX, AZ — Today, President Joe Biden announced that the U.S. Department of the Treasury approved $83 million in federal funds from the American Rescue Plan’s[Capital Projects Fund](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/coronavirus/assistance-for-state-local-and-tribal-governments/capital-projects-fund)to construct the McCain Library in Phoenix, Arizona, a new 83,000 square foot library near Papago Park. In addition to serving as the anchor to the planned McCain Campus at Arizona State University (ASU), the multi-purpose facility named after the late Senator John McCain, will provide education, work, and health monitoring programs to underserved communities. Specifically, in partnership with the McCain Institute and ASU, the McCain Library will play an important role in bridging the digital divide for community members by providing a physical space and technology for telemedicine, health screenings and monitoring, job fairs, and employment training programs and skills development training classes. The McCain Library is expected to attract an estimated 50,000-100,000 visitors each year.

“TheTreasury Department is proud to support the development of a community center that will continue Senator McCain’s legacy of service,” said Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo. “The McCain Library, financed by the American Rescue Plan’s Capital Projects Fund, shows how the Biden-Harris Administration’s historic investments are providing new opportunities for communities to fully participate and compete in the 21st century economy.”

“John McCain was fearlessly independent – always putting our democracy, state, and country above party. As Arizona’s senior Senator, I draw inspiration from Senator McCain’s enduring legacy every day to do what’s right for our state and country – I’m proud to see that legacy celebrated and memorialized in the new McCain Library,” said Senator Kyrsten Sinema.

“I’ve looked up to John McCain since I was a young Navy pilot,” said Senator Mark Kelly. “The McCain Library at ASU will be a place for future generations to learn about his legacy and a continuation of his service to our country.”

“John McCain was a tireless fighter for Arizonans. This library is a fitting dedication to his legacy of service,” said Congressman Ruben Gallego. “Thanks to funds I helped pass in the American Rescue Plan, the McCain Library will provide technology, health care, and education access to thousands of Arizonans. I commend the Administration for spearheading this incredibly important effort to honor the memory of an Arizonan icon.”

“Defending liberty and democracy—abroad and at home—was Senator McCain’s life’s work, and the legacy he left future generations to build upon. It’s only fitting that the McCain Library here at Arizona State University will instruct future national security and diplomatic leaders,” Congressman Greg Stanton said. “While Senator McCain was a giant in Washington, his heart was always here at home. I know he would be deeply honored to see American Rescue Plan funding put to good use helping underserved communities access health care, education and job training.”

“With today’s announcement of the McCain Library, the stories of Senator McCain’s bold defense of Americans’ rights both at home and abroad will become much more than just stories. Everything ranging from advancing human rights, to developing capable leaders, to safeguarding democracy, will run through this center, just as it has run through Arizona. I am proud to make this investment in our state and our community, and I am so looking forward to what we will accomplish together,” said Governor Katie Hobbs.

Today’s funding comes from the American Rescue Plan’s Capital Projects Fund (CPF), part of President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda. The fund provides a total of $10 billion to states, territories, freely associated states, and Tribal governments to fund critical capital projects that enable work, education, and health monitoring. In addition to today’s announcement, earlier this year, Arizona was[approved](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1287#:~:text=WASHINGTON%20%E2%80%94%20Today%2C%20the%20U.S.%20Department,Arizona%2C%20Tennessee%2C%20and%20Wyoming.)to receive $99.4 million in CPF funding for high-speed internet infrastructure, which the state estimates will connect an estimated 127,807 households and businesses to high-speed internet access.

The Treasury Department began announcing state awards in[June 2022](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1526). To date, CPF has awarded over $8.5 billion for broadband, digital technology, and multi-purpose community center projects in all 50 states and three U.S. territories, which these states and territories estimate will reach over two million locations with expanded internet access, in addition to the hundreds of thousands of individuals who will be served annually by multi-purpose community facilities.

###
