---
title: 'READOUT: Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo’s Visit to Germany'
date: 2023-11-02
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1869
---
BERLIN – On October 31, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo was in Berlin, Germany, to deepen the strong partnership between the United States and Germany and to further cooperation on shared economic and security priorities. Deputy Secretary Adeyemo’s visit to Berlin was the last stop of his trip to Europe, which also included[London](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1852)and[Brussels](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1859).

In Berlin, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo joined German Vice Chancellor and Federal Minister for Economic Affairs and Climate Action Dr. Robert Habeck to participate in the 2023 Industry Conference. Ahead of a panel discussion with Vice Chancellor Habeck,[Deputy Secretary Adeyemo delivered remarks on the importance of the U.S. and Germany working together](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1855)to meet their climate and energy security goals, build strong and resilient critical supply chains, address shared risks and vulnerabilities, and create economic opportunity in both nations. Deputy Secretary Adeyemo described how the Inflation Reduction Act strengthens the economic relationship between both countries, and benefits not just the United States, but also Germany, Europe, and the rest of world.

Deputy Secretary Adeyemo also held official meetings in Berlin, including with Vice Chancellor Habeck and Secretary of State of the Federal Foreign Office Susanne Baumann. In his meetings, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo expressed appreciation for Germany’s leadership, in collaboration with the United States, on tackling common challenges, including Russia’s illegal war in Ukraine and the economic spillovers it has caused. Deputy Secretary Adeyemo and his counterparts discussed the importance of continued coordination on sanctions against Russia and countering Russia’s evasion efforts, and Deputy Secretary Adeyemo also reaffirmed the United States’ steadfast commitment to providing essential assistance to Ukraine. Deputy Secretary Adeyemo also raised ongoing work to deny Hamas’s access to financing, while ensuring humanitarian assistance can flow to the people of Gaza, and the need for the United States, Germany, and its partners to work together on both fronts.

While in Berlin, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo also joined German Member of Parliament Armand Zorn for a roundtable discussion, hosted by the U.S. Embassy, with around 30 emerging German leaders in the fields of economics, finance, policy, and social entrepreneurship. Both officials described their own personal and professional journey and had a conversation with participants about their shared work to expand economic opportunity in every community, as well as the values, challenges, and aspirations that unite the German and American people.

###
