---
title: 'READOUT: Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo’s Visit to Belgium'
date: 2023-10-31T16:15:21-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1859
---
BRUSSELS – On October 30, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Adeyemo was in Brussels, Belgium, to build on the strong relationship between the United States and Belgium, as well its other European partners and advance cooperation on shared priorities.

While in Brussels, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo met with senior government and private sector officials, including Secretary-General of the European External Action Service of the European Union (EU) Stefano Sannino, Belgian Ambassador to the EU Willem van de Voorde, National Bank of Belgium Director Tim Hermans, and Euroclear Bank CEO Peter Sneyers.

In his meetings, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo covered a range of topics, including the ongoing collaboration among the United States, EU, Belgium, and other partners on limiting Russia’s ability to fund its illegal war in Ukraine through sanctions and other measures, preventing its procurement of critical components to support its production of weapons, and holding Russia accountable for the damage it has inflicted on Ukraine. They discussed the EU’s proposal to harness windfall profits on Russian sovereign assets immobilized in Europe and the EU’s forthcoming sanctions package, and both sides discussed additional opportunities for the U.S. and its European partners to work together to advance shared objectives. Deputy Secretary Adeyemo also reaffirmed the United States’ continued commitment to providing economic assistance to Ukraine.

In Brussels, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo and European officials also discussed Hamas and the actions the United States is taking, in consultation with its European and other partners, to deny Hamas’s access to financing, while ensuring humanitarian assistance can flow to the people of Gaza. Deputy Secretary Adeyemo raised areas where the U.S. and European partners can work together to maximize impact and underscored the need to move with urgency.

While in Brussels, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo also convened a roundtable with humanitarian organizations to underscore the United States’ commitment to ensuring legitimate humanitarian assistance can flow to the people of Gaza.[A full readout is available here.](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1854)

###
