---
title: 'READOUT: Assistant Secretary Alexia Latortue and Special Presidential Advisor Dodd host Meeting of the Finance Track of the Americas Partnership for Economic Prosperity'
date: 2024-03-08
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2163
---
PUNTA CANA – The United States hosted a meeting of the Finance Track of the Americas Partnership for Economic Prosperity on the sidelines of the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) Annual Meetings in Punta Cana, Dominican Republic.  The meeting was chaired by Treasury Assistant Secretary for International Trade and Development Alexia Latortue and Special Presidential Advisor for the Americas Chris Dodd.  IDB President Ilan Goldfajn; Barbados Prime Minister Mia Amor Mottley; Finance Ministers from Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Panama, Peru, and Uruguay; and representatives from Canada, Chile, and Mexico attended.

During the meeting, Assistant Secretary Latortue updated Americas Partnership countries on progress made in the Finance Track, including the approval of a capital increase for IDB Invest and a new Institutional Strategy for the IDB Group.  Special Presidential Advisor Dodd spoke to President Biden’s commitment to the Americas Partnership and the importance of the joint U.S.-IDB financing initiatives he announced at the Leaders’ Summit on November 3, 2023.  Discussions with Finance Ministers centered on the supply chain competitiveness plans that are being developed in conjunction with the IDB.  These plans aim to develop and strengthen hemispheric supply chains that will improve regional integration, boost supply chain security, and create quality jobs across the region.

President Biden launched the Americas Partnership as a forum for bolstering regional competitiveness and mobilizing high-standard investment in our hemisphere.  Along with the United States, inaugural Americas Partnership countries include Barbados, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama, Peru, and Uruguay.

###
