---
title: 'READOUT: U.S. Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo Hosts Roundtable Conversation with Early Users of IRS Direct File'
date: 2024-04-04T13:26:40-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2222
---
**WASHINGTON** – Yesterday evening, U.S. Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo and Chief Implementation Officer for the Inflation Reduction Act Laurel Blatchford held a virtual roundtable conversation with six taxpayers from California, New York, Texas, and Washington who have filed their taxes using the new, free IRS Direct File tool. Participants included a college student, military veterans, as well as nonprofit and government employees.

In the conversation, taxpayers shared feedback on their experiences with Direct File and suggestions for how to continue to improve the product if the Direct File Pilot is expanded in the 2025 Filing Season.

Taxpayers relayed that Direct File was straightforward to use, and they valued features that allowed them to learn more about different tax situations, credits, and deductions. Taxpayers emphasized their appreciation for the fact that Direct File is always free and there are no hidden fees or attempts to upsell users as they moved through the filing process. Taxpayers also shared that filing directly with the IRS gave them confidence, they were able to quickly fix mistakes, and get their taxes filed accurately.

If the Direct File pilot continues past this Filing Season, taxpayers encouraged Treasury and the IRS to expand tax situations covered by Direct File and explore the ability to import information already known to the IRS. Overall, all taxpayers said that they have recommended Direct File to friends and family who may be eligible and said they would use Direct File again.

###
