---
title: Public Affairs
date: 2025-10-22
draft: false
url: /about/offices
description: The Office of Public Affairs handles Treasury communications, media relations, and public engagement.
---

### Domestic Finance

Domestic Finance advises and assists in areas of domestic finance, banking, and other related economic matters. It develops policies and guidance for Treasury Department activities in the areas of financial institutions, federal debt finance, financial regulation, and capital markets.

### Economic Policy

Economic Policy reports on current and prospective economic developments and assists in the determination of appropriate economic policies. The office is responsible for the review and analysis of both domestic and international economic issues and developments in the financial markets.

### General Counsel

General Counsel provides legal and policy advice to the Secretary and other senior Departmental officials. The General Counsel also is the head of the Treasury Legal Division, a separate bureau within the Department that includes all legal counsels of the Treasury Department and their staff.

### Inflation Reduction Act

Treasury leadership created a new Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) Program Office, led by a Chief Implementation Officer, to serve as the Department’s coordination hub for implementation of the IRA’s provisions. The Office partners with other Treasury offices, the IRS, the White House, and other federal agencies to provide internal and external coordination and offer additional capacity and support as the IRS delivers on modernization plans and as taxpayers utilize the law’s clean energy tax incentives.

### International Affairs

International Affairs protects and supports U.S. economic prosperity by strengthening the external environment for U.S. growth, preventing and mitigating global financial instability, and managing key global challenges.

### Legislative Affairs

Legislative Affairs advises the Secretary on congressional relations matters in order to assist in the formulation of policy and determining the overall direction of the Department. The Office serves as the principal contact and coordinator for all Department interaction with the Congress and the Congressional Relations offices in the White House and other Departments and agencies.

### Management

Management is responsible for the internal management and policy of the Department in the areas of budget, planning, human resources, information and technology management, financial management and accounting, procurement, privacy, records, and administrative services to Departmental (Headquarters) Offices.

### Financial Research

The OFR is an Office within Treasury established by Congress to serve the Financial Stability Oversight Council, its member agencies, and the public by improving the quality, transparency, and accessibility of financial data and information; by conducting and sponsoring research related to financial stability; and by promoting best practices in risk management.

### Financial Stability

The Financial Stability Oversight Council (Council) was established in 2010 by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act to identify risks to the financial stability of the United States; promote market discipline; and respond to emerging threats to the stability of the U.S. financial system. The Office of the Financial Stability Oversight Council at Treasury was created to support the work of the Council.[Information related to the Troubled Asset Relief Program can be found here](https://home.treasury.gov/data/troubled-asset-relief-program).

### Public Affairs

Public Affairs develops and implements communications strategy for the Department and advises officials within the Department and its bureaus how best to communicate issues and priorities of public interest.

### RECOVERY PROGRAMS

The Office of Recovery Programs leads the Department’s implementation of economic relief and recovery programs related to economic challenges precipitated by the COVID-19 pandemic.

### Tax Policy

Tax Policy develops and implements tax policies and programs; reviews regulations and rulings to administer the Internal Revenue Code, negotiates tax treaties, provides economic and legal policy analysis for domestic and international tax policy decisions. It also provides estimates for the President's budget, fiscal policy decisions, and cash management decisions.

### Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (TFI)

Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (TFI) develops and implements U.S. government strategies to combat terrorist financing domestically and internationally, develops and implements the National Money Laundering Strategy as well as other policies and programs to fight financial crimes.

### Treasurer of the United States

The Treasurer of the United States oversees the Bureau of Engraving and Printing and the United States Mint. In addition, the Treasurer serves as a senior advisor and representative of the Treasury on behalf of the Secretary in the areas of community development and public engagement.

### Tribal and Native Affairs

The Office of Tribal and Native Affairs is committed to working with Tribal governments and Indigenous communities to promote economic prosperity. The Office is presently overseen by the Treasurer of the United States, Chief Lynn Malerba, the first Native American to hold this position. The Office was established in September of 2022 by Treasury to (1) to advise on Tribal policy and program implementation; (2) coordinate Tribal consultations; and (3) manage the Treasury Tribal Advisory Committee (TTAC).
