---
title: Statement of Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin Closing Press Conference of the Buenos Aires Money Laundering Conference Buenos Aires, Argentina
date: 1995-12-02
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr748
---
*(Archived Content)*

One year ago in Miami, the leaders of this hemisphere s democratic nations directed their governments to work on a cooperative plan to counter the growing economic and legal problems of money laundering. They rightly recognized the very dangerous and destructive effect money laundering has on our economies, and on both our private and public institutions. Money laundering is central to profit taking in the drug trade.

This communique marks an important milestone in our efforts to protect the integrity of our economies and the health of our societies. Today, the nations of this hemisphere have declared there can be no sanctuary for money launderers. Today, the nations of this hemisphere are telling organized crime that we will work together to make it harder for criminals to legitimize the proceeds of crime. We are telling the drug lords that every democratic nation in the hemisphere intends to strengthen its laws and regulations to make money laundering a crime, and to make it easier to detect, prosecute and punish money launderers.

This communique provides the countries of this hemisphere a powerful vantage point to attack the drug trade by denying a haven for its profits. Profits that can t be spent are not profits.

The plan of action adopted today contains a detailed set of goals, recognizing that different nations have different levels of legal structures on financial crimes in place at the moment.

To sum up the major elements, first, the participants have agreed that laws to criminalize the laundering of money from illicit drugs and other serious crimes should be enacted.

Second, because laws and regulations must deny criminals unfettered access to our financial institutions, countries should establish systems that the United States and other nations have to report possible criminal financial activity. We believe that countries should also create financial intelligence units which can help spot money laundering crimes and support the prosecution of financial crimes.

And, third, nations should expand the tools available to law enforcement personnel in fighting financial crimes, including making financial transactions more transparent, and providing for the forfeiture of assets.

Finally, the ministers of the hemisphere here this weekend have agreed to ask the Organization of American States to undertake candid assessments of the compliance of individual nations with the principles delineated in the communique.

In closing, let me say that President Clinton has demonstrated a clear and very vigorous commitment to countering organized crime and the drug sellers of the world. He is striving at home to reduce demand for illegal drugs, especially through treatment and prevention programs, and to step up enforcement by deploying more police. We know we must do a better job in this regard. At the same time, the President has directed me as Treasury Secretary, and the Secretaries of State and Justice, to take a number of steps that will be complementary to the broader hemispheric plan of action we have agreed to today.

As he made clear at the United Nations General Assembly in October, money laundering is a problem of global proportions. In a truly international economy, when technology allows the rapid movement of large sums of money around the world, we must not -- as the President said -- allow criminals to wash the blood off the profits of drug sales, or finance terrorism or underwrite all manner of crime, by leaving open avenues for the laundering of the proceeds of crime.

Thank you.
