---
title: TREASURY’S KELLY ELECTED TO TOP INTERPOL POST
date: 1997-10-22
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2001
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Under Secretary for Enforcement Raymond W. Kelly was elected Vice President for the Americas at INTERPOL’s 66th General Assembly Session in New Delhi, Indiayesterday.

Prior to his tenure at Treasury, Under Secretary Kelly served as Police Commissioner of the New York City PoliceDepartment for two years after serving in every rank and 25 commands of the department. AsPolice Commissioner, he directed the successful investigation of the 1993 World TradeCenter bombing. After his retirement in 1994, Kelly helped establish the interim publicsecurity force in Haiti, earning a commendation from President Clinton forexceptionally meritorious service.

Ray Kelly has beendoinga tremendous job heading up Treasury’s enforcement efforts against money laundering,drug smuggling and arms trafficking, said Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin.His distinguished law enforcement credentials will bring to INTERPOL the experienceand leadership skills essential to fullfill its mission to combat transnationalcrime.

During his three-year term,Under Secretary Kelly will concentrate on the 177-member organization’s fight againsttransnational crime. INTERPOL’s services include the near instantaneous,international transmission of criminal investigative data via its dedicated, worldwidetelecommunications network. Under Secretary Kelly previously served as a delegate to theINTERPOL Executive Committee.

I am delighted thatRayKelly has been elected Vice President for the Americas at INTERPOL’s General AssemblySession, said Attorney General Reno. His experience in both the military andin law enforcement will give INTERPOL’s leadership vital hands-on experience incombating crime that crosses international borders.

As Treasury Under Secretarysince June 1996, Kelly has had direct supervisory authority over the Department’senforcement bureaus which include the U.S. Customs Service, the U.S. Secret Service, theBureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, and the Office of Foreign Assets Control.
