---
title: TIMOTHY F. GEITHNER NAMED ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
date: 1997-07-11
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr1816
---
*(Archived Content)*

President Clinton today announced hisintent to nominate Senior Deputy Assistant Secretary of theTreasury for International Affairs Timothy F. Geithner to beAssistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs.

 

ATimGeithner has made an important contribution to our internationaleconomic policy team by playing a key role in formulating ourU.S. exchange rate policy and U.S. policy toward Japan,@Secretary Rubinsaid.

 

Geithner is currently serving at theTreasury as the Senior Deputy Assistant Secretary forInternational Affairs. Prior to that position, he served as theDeputy Assistant Secretary for International Monetary andFinancial Policy. Geithner has served as a career civil servantat the Treasury Department since 1988.

 

The Assistant Secretary forInternational Affairs advises and assists the Secretary, DeputySecretary and Under Secretary for International Affairs in theformulation and execution of U.S. international economic policy.Specifically, this office is responsible for developing andexecuting U.S. policy in the areas of international economic andfinancial diplomacy; international monetary policy issues,including exchange rate policy; economic policy cooperation amongindustrial nations (G-7); U.S. participation in the internationalfinancial institutions; financial services negotiations andpolicy issues affecting international financial markets; andinternational trade and investment policy.

 

Geithner was born on August 18, 1961, inNew York City. He received a B.A. in Government and Asian Studiesfrom Dartmouth College and a M.A. in International Economics andEast Asian Studies from Johns Hopkins University. He is marriedto Carole Sonnenfeld Geithner and has two children.
