---
title: U.S. TREASURY OFFICIAL HOSTS ROUNDTABLE CONVERSATION ON RACE
date: 1997-11-28
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2086
---

Treasury Deputy Assistant Secretary Alex Rodriguez hosted a discussion called *One America: Conversations that Bring Us Together* as part of President Clinton's Initiative on Race. The roundtable was conducted Wednesday in Boston, MA, and was also hosted by Bettie Baca, the Senior Advisor to the Administrator at the Small Business Administration.



Building one America is our most important mission ... money cannot buy it. Power cannot compel it. Technology cannot create it. It can only come from the human spirit, said President Clinton on June 14, 1997.



The One America Conversation held in Boston was part of a national effort to move the country closer to a stronger, more just, unified America, one that offers opportunity and fairness for all Americans. It was a chance for citizens in Boston to be a part of a great national conversation. The President is asking all Americans to join him in a national effort to address the issues of race and share their ideas about how we can build One America together. This effort combines thoughtful study, constructive dialogue, and positive action to address the continuing challenge of how to live and work more productively as One America in the 21st century.



Following each One America Conversation, a report is sent to the White House and a monthly report will be written for the President and others in his Administration. The purpose of the One America Conversations is to give its citizens around the nation an opportunity to share their concerns and ideas with the White House.
