---
title: 'TREASURY ANNOUNCES SECOND "EFT 99" PUBLIC HEARING -- 69 DAYS REMAIN IN PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD --'
date: 1997-10-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/pr100897
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

pr100897

   

The Treasury Department today announced that anyone wishing to attend or make a presentation at the second public hearing on the new Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT 99) proposal must contact the Department by Friday, October 10. The public comment period on this proposal will last for 69 more days and include public hearings in Baltimore, Maryland and New York, New York. The New York hearing will convene Monday, October 20, at 10:00 a.m., at the U.S. Alexander Hamilton Customs House, 1 Bowling Green.

Requests to attend or present oral comments at the hearing should be directed to Martha Thomas-Mitchell at (202)874-6757.

Requests to present oral comments must be accompanied by an outline of topics to be discussed. Three business days prior to the      hearing, presenters are requested to submit, in writing, the text of the comments to be made.

Presentations will be limited to approximately 10 minutes or less. Treasury reserves the right to impose further time or other restrictions on all presentations.

In September, the Treasury Department announced its proposal to implement a new law that requires that all Federal payments, except tax refunds, be made electronically beginning January 2, 1999. This new initiative, mandated by Congress in the Omnibus Consolidated Rescissions and Appropriations Act of 1996, will significantly improve the way millions of Americans who are entitled to government payments obtain their funds. The Department hopes to receive extensive input from recipients and other affected entities on the proposed rule.

More information about the rule or the schedule of public hearings is available to the public on Treasurys website at http://www.fms.treas.gov/eft.
