---
title: STATEMENT OF TREASURY SECRETARY ROBERT E. RUBIN
date: 1997-11-03
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2044
---
*(Archived Content)*

I welcome the Senate’s vote this evening to confirm Charles Rossotti as the new commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service. His confirmation is an important step in the Clinton Administration’s plan to reform the IRS.



Charles Rossotti brings private sector expertise to the IRS that will be crucial in providing first-rate customer service and expanding the use of information technology to better serve the American taxpayer. He shares the Clinton Administration’s commitment to building a fair, efficient and accountable IRS. I encourage Congress to pass currently pending IRS reform legislation to give Charles Rossotti the tools he needs to continue our efforts to reform the IRS.



Charles Rossotti has the management and leadership skills necessary to manage the agency responsible for collection of 95 percent of the nation’s revenue. I know that as commissioner, Charles Rossotti will give IRS employees the training and direction they need to do their jobs. I look forward to working closely with him to build an IRS that can best serve the American people.



As we welcome our new commissioner, I would also like to commend Acting Commissioner Michael Dolan who has led the agency for the last five months. Michael Dolan is a true public servant who has worked hard to implement change at the IRS. I welcome his continued leadership as deputy commissioner.
