---
title: 'TREASURY''S BEA PROGRAM ACCEPTING APPLICATIONS, $16.25 MILLION AVAILABLE TO BANKS'
date: 1997-03-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr1544
---
*(Archived Content)*

TheU.S. Department of the Treasury's Community Development FinancialInstitutions (CDFI) Fund is pleased to announce the beginning of the second round of the Bank Enterprise Award (BEA) Program. ANotice of Funds Availability and the revised interim regulationsfor the program was published today, March 7, 1997, in theFederalRegister. The CDFI Fund intends to make available up to$16.25 million for Bank Enterprise Awards in this round.

TheBEA Program recognizes the key role played by insured depositoryinstitutions (banks and thrifts) in serving the credit needs ofdistressed communities across our nation. In recent years, manyof these traditional financial institutions have increased theirefforts to lend, invest, and provide services in distressedcommunities. By offering incentives for these activities, the BEAProgram builds on these efforts.

TheBEA Program is intended to encourage banks and thrifts to investin and support community development financial institutions(CDFIs) and to increase the lending and services provided indistressed communities by traditional financial institutions.

Inthe first round of the BEA Program, 38 institutions received$13.1 million in awards ranging in size from $3,750 to nearly$2.7 million, with a median award of approximately $100,000.These institutions ranged in asset size from $21 million to over$320 billion.

Thedeadline for applications is April 25, 1997.

TheCDFI Fund is holding a series of regional workshops to provide anoverview of the revised BEA Program regulations, an explanationof the streamlines application materials, and an opportunity toask questions. Each workshop will last approximately 2 and 1/2hours. Bank and thrift representatives interested in attendingshould contact the individual listed below.

 

**BOSTONSAN FRANCISCO **March 13, 9 a.m. March 14, 9 a.m.Federal Reserve Bank Federal Reserve Bank600 Atlantic Avenue 101 Market StreetRSVP: Mark Lloret RSVP: Mary Malone(617) 973-3097 (415) 974-2871** DALLASMIAMI **March 18, 9 a.m. March 19, 9 a.m.Federal Reserve Bank Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta220 North Pearl Street 9100 NW 36th StreetRSVP: Louisa Quittman RSVP: Jennifer Grier(202) 622-8103 (404) 589-7374** NEWYORK**March 26, 9 a.m.The College of Insurance101 Murray StreetRSVP: Louisa Quittman(202) 622-8103

Toobtain an application packet, send a written request by facsimilewhich includes the name and title of the requestor, the name of the institution, the mailing address, phone number and facsimilenumber to (202) 622-2599.

Forfurther information on the BEA Program, contact Jennifer Jacokesof the CDFI Fund at (202) 622-8662.
