---
title: NANCY KILLEFER
date: 1997-09-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr1920
---
*(Archived Content)*

NOMINATION TO BE TREASURY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR MANAGEMENT AND CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER

SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE

   

Mr. Chairman, Senator Moynihan, and distinguished members of the Committee, it is a distinct honor to come before the Senate Finance Committee to be considered for the position of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Management and Chief Financial Officer. I am also honored that the President and Secretary Rubin have seen fit to submit my nomination for your consideration. I am accompanied today by members of family: my husband, Bob Cumby, my children Jamie and Robbie, and my mother, Mrs. Constance Killefer.

 

The principle responsibility of this position in the Treasury Department is to provide a strong management support and oversight for the bureaus that make up the Treasury Department. In addition, and no less important, the job as the Chief Financial Officer brings together the overall financial interests of the Secretary and the operating officers of the bureaus.

 

When I look at the scope of the work that Treasury employees perform each year, their involvement in every aspect of our society makes it important that we do everything we can to enable each person in each bureau perform at their very best. It is Secretary Rubin’s commitment to performance improvement that made me feel that I could make a contribution by seeking this job.

 

In preparation for my career in the business world, I graduated with a Bachelor’s degree in Economics . After working for a micro-economics firm, I went on to obtain a Master of Science Management in Finance. During the last 18 years, I have specialized as

a management consultant working with senior management at a number of America’s largest corporations on a full range of management issues including strategy, organization, marketing and systems. My work has focused on how to improve performance within the financial and human resource limits that all organizations must face, whether private business, non-profit agencies, or the government.

 

Congress and the past two administrations have provided broad guidelines for improving government performance. The Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990, the Government Performance and Results Act of 1993, the Government Management Reform Act of 1994, the, and the Information Technology Management Reform Act of 1996 all point the way to using the experience from business and government to make the tax dollar work better for our taxpayers.

 

Because of this environment, and Secretary Rubin’s commitment to change and improvement of all of the Treasury bureaus, I have been inspired to seek this position to help make that commitment a reality. I will use my experience to fill in the specific details to the guidelines developed by Congress.

 

My husband and our two children have encouraged me to take this leap. With the help of this committee, I hope to fulfill some part of all our hopes for making our government work better for the American people.
