---
title: GARY GENSLER NAMED ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR FINANCIAL MARKETS
date: 1997-06-27
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr1797
---
*(Archived Content)*

President Clinton today announced his nomination of GaryGensler to be Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for FinancialMarkets.



Gensler is a partner of the international investment bankingfirm, The Goldman Sachs Group, L.P. Gensler joined Goldman Sachsin 1979 in the Mergers & Acquisition Department. In 1984, heassumed responsibility for the firm’s efforts advising mediacompanies and was elected a partner in 1988. Gensler subsequentlyjoined the firm’s Fixed Income Division a and directedGoldman’s Fixed Income and Currency trading efforts inTokyo. Since 1995, Gensler has been Co-head of Finance forGoldman Sachs worldwide.



As Assistant Secretary for Financial Markets, Gensler willserve as a senior advisor to the Secretary of the Treasury indeveloping and implementing the Federal Government’spolicies and plans for debt management and the sale of U.S.government securities. He will further advise on broad matters ofFederal, State and local finance, including leading theTreasury’s participation in the financing of the District ofColumbia. Gensler will serve as a senior member of the TreasuryFinancing Group and the Working Group on Financial Markets.



Gensler graduated summa cum laude from the University ofPennsylvania’s Wharton School in 1978 with a Bachelor ofScience in Economics, where he also received a Master of BusinessAdministration from the Graduate Division in 1979. Gensler is aNational Trustee of The Baltimore Museum of Art. He and his wife,Francesca Danieli, have three daughters and reside in New YorkCity. Gensler was born in Baltimore, Maryland.
