---
title: TIMOTHY F. GEITHNER CONFIRMED AS ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
date: 1997-09-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr1940
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

The United States Senate last night voted to confirm Timothy F. Geithner as the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs.

   

Mr. Geithner most recently served at the Treasury Department as the Senior Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Affairs. Prior to that position, he served as the Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Monetary and Financial Policy. Mr. Geithner has served as a career civil servant at the Treasury Department since 1988.

 

As Assistant Secretary for International Affairs, Mr. Geithner advises and assists the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, and Under Secretary for International Affairs in the formulation and execution of U.S. International economic policy. Specifically, Mr. Geithner is responsible for developing and executing U.S. Policy in the areas of international ecomny and financial diplomacy; international monetary policy issues, including exchange rate policy; economic policy cooperation among industrial nations (G-7); U.S. Participation in the international financial institutiuons; financial services negociations and policy issues affecting international financial markets; and international trade and investment policy.

 

Mr. Geithner was born on August 18, 1961, in New York City. He received a B.A. in Government and Asian Studies from Dartmouth College and a M.A. in International Econmics and East Asian Studies from Johns Hopkins University. He is married to Carole Sonnenfeld Geithner and has two children.
