---
title: STATEMENT OF SECRETARY ROBERT E. RUBIN
date: 1997-10-21
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2003
---
*(Archived Content)*

Over the past two years, the Clinton Administration has had one goal in reforming the IRS: to better serve the American taxpayer. In order to do this, the IRS needs to provide the fairest possible treatment for all taxpayers, strong customer service, and effective use of technology, all while collecting the nation’s revenue. We are making real progress. The computer modernization program has been restructured, telephone service is improved, and electronic filing is increasing. But there is much more to be done. 

With the work of the National Commission on Restructuring the IRS, a series of Administration announcements, beginning with a speech in March by Deputy Secretary Summers, and the important input of the National Performance Review, a consensus has formed around the need for better oversight, greater continuity of leadership, improved access to expert advice from the private sector, additional management flexibility, and more stable and predictable funding for the IRS. We have taken and will take further significant executive actions designed to achieve these goals, including commitments to 24 hour phone service by 1999, the formation of independent Citizen Advisory Panels, and the nomination of an experienced, private-sector CEO as IRS Commissioner.



In its current form, the House Ways and Means Committee bill to be reported out tomorrow will be an important step in this process and reflects the emerging consensus on how best to build the IRS the American people deserve. The Administration has been working extensively with Members of Congress to resolve differences and move forward on the many areas of common ground. Over the past week, we have worked with Members of the House Ways and Means Committee and made substantial progress in critical areas, including clarification of executive branch responsibility, the hiring of a new commissioner, and ensuring accountability with respect to IRS law enforcement.



In addition to the proposals affecting IRS oversight, the bill now includes strong provisions reflecting proposals we have made in the areas of the Taxpayer Bill of Rights, greater personnel flexibilities for the IRS, and electronic filing. We believe that this is now on balance a workable

  

plan and one that we can support, though improvements can and should be made. We intend to continue to work with Members of Congress to improve the bill as the process moves forward.  As we move forward, we should bear in mind that the problems at the IRS have developed over many years, and they will take sustained effort over time to fully resolve. We are fully committed to change and to building the fair, efficient and accountable IRS the American people deserve.
