---
title: TREASURY AWARDS OVER $54 MILLION IN COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FUNDS
date: 1997-08-30
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/pr1971
---
*(Archived Content)*

    

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

PR-1971



Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin announced today that the Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) Fund awarded 48 community organizations a total of $38.3 million in financial and technical assistance in the second round of CDFI Program. In addition, 55 insured depository institutions will receive $16.9 million in incentive grants in the second round of the Funds Bank Enterprise Award (BEA) Program.



The CDFI Fund was created by President Clinton in 1994 to expand the availability of credit, investment capital, and financial services in distressed urban and rural communities. The CDFI Fund administers two main programs: the CDFI Program and the BEA Program.



The CDFI Program provides capital to specialized, community-based financial institutions known as Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) that work in underserved market niches.



The BEA Program provides incentives to insured depository institutions to invest in CDFIs and to increase lending and financial services in distressed communities.



The CDFI Fund is a sound investment for the Federal government, said Secretary Rubin. The Fund is helping to bring hope and opportunity to communities that have long been left behind. Local community-based institutions that have received CDFI funding are creating jobs and revitalizing Americas neighborhoods. This public-private partnership is essential to ensuring the nations financial system works to the benefit of all Americans.



The assistance being provided by the CDFI Program will dramatically strengthen the 48 CDFI awardees, enabling them to provide needed capital and financial services in the distressed communities they serve and to low-income individuals otherwise lacking access to these services. CDFIs provide critical lending and investing for such activities as home purchase and rehabilitation, multi-family and special needs housing, microenterprise development, small business and agriculture enterprises, community facilities such as child care and health care centers; in addition to providing needed financial services such as checking and savings accounts.



The BEA Program works hand-in-hand with the CDFI Program by rewarding insured depository institutions that increase their level of qualified community development activities. The institutions were selected for increasing their direct investment in CDFIs; and for increasing their level of lending, investment, and the provision of financial services within the distressed communities they serve.



BEA awards are disbursed only after the activities proposed by the institutions have actually been completed. Approximately $83 million has been provided in direct community investment by BEA awardees, including $59 million in new lending for multi-family housing. BEA recipients have financed such projects as the construction of new health clinics, a senior care facility, a homeless shelter and a home for people with AIDS. In addition, nearly $66 million in loans, equity investments and grants have been provided directly to CDFIs.



The CDFI Program will help build the capacity of the CDFI awardees to more effectively serve their communities and to expand into new areas. Rather than funding specific projects, the CDFI Fund allows decisions about how to best meet community needs to be made by the local organizations.



The CDFI Program leverages Federal dollars by requiring that each CDFI provide a one-to-one match with funds from non-Federal sources for each dollar of assistance it receives. In addition, CDFIs receiving assistance from the Fund are held to performance standards that help ensure that the Federal investment will result in significant community development impact.



The CDFIs receiving assistance from the Fund include community development banks, multi-bank community development corporations, credit unions, loan funds, venture funds and microenterprise loan funds. The assistance may be made in various forms, including equity investments, grants, loans, and funding for technical assistance.



In order to leverage assistance to even more CDFIs, for the first time, the CDFI Fund is providing assistance to two CDFIs under a new Intermediary Component of the CDFI Program. This assistance will be passed on to smaller, newer, and harder to reach CDFIs.



These intermediary institutions, which meet the same criteria as other CDFIs, will be able to provide financial and specialized technical assistance to approximately 200 community development credit unions and community development loan funds across the country.

  

Attached is the list of CDFI and BEA awardees.

  

CDFIs selected for funding under the Core Component of the CDFI Program are:



ACCION El Paso, Inc. El Paso, TX $130,000 grant & $200,000 loan



Alaska Growth Capital BIDCO, Inc. Anchorage, AK $1,000,000 equity investment



Albina Community Bancorp Portland, OR $400,000 equity investment



Alternatives Federal Credit Union Ithaca, NY $750,000 grant & $57,000 technical assistance



Boston Community Capital, Inc. (formerly BCLF, Inc.) Jamaica Plain, MA $435,000 grant & $565 equity investment



Boston Bank of Commerce Boston, MA $750,000 equity investment



Central Appalachian Peoples Federal Credit Union Berea, KY $425,000 grant & $100,000 loan & $50,000 technical assistance



Chowan Credit Union, Inc. Edenton, NC $150,000 grant & $25,000 technical assistance



Coastal Enterprise, Inc. Wiscasset, ME $2,500,000 grant



College Heights Credit Union Fayetteville, NC $175,000 grant & $30,000 technical assistance



Colorado Enterprise Fund Denver, CO $250,000 grant $25,000 technical assistance



Community Investment Corporation Chicago, IL $1,000,000 grant



Community Loan Fund of New Jersey, Inc. Trenton, NJ $800,000 grant & $400,000 loan & $30,000 technical assistance



Community Ventures Corporation Lexington, KY $350,000 grant



Cooperative Business Assistance Corporation Camden, NJ $500,000 grant & $500,000 loan



Enterprise Development Corporation The Plains, OH $125,000 grant



The Enterprise Foundation Columbia, MD $2,500,000 grant



Housing Development Fund of Lower Fairfield County, Inc. Stamford, CT $78,500 grant



Institute for Community Economics, Inc. Springfield, MA $1,125,000 grant & $96,100 technical assistance



Jackson/Hinds Minority Capital Fund, Inc. Jackson, MS $700,000 grant



Leviticus 25:23 Alternative Fund, Inc. Yonkers, NY $250,000 grant



Local Initiative Support Corporation New York, NY $1,000,000 grant



Low Income Housing Fund San Francisco, CA $165,000 technical assistance



Minority Investment Development Corporation Providence, RI $750,000 equity investment



Neighborhood Bancorp San Diego, CA $1,500,000 equity investment



Neighborhood Housing Services of Chicago, Inc. Chicago, IL $960,000 grant



New Mexico Community Development Loan Fund, Inc. Albuquerque, NM $600,000 grant



Northcountry Cooperative Development Fund, Inc. Minneapolis, MN $185,000 equity investment



Northeast Entrepreneur Fund, Inc. Virginia, MN $250,000 grant & $35,000 technical assistance



PPEP Microbusiness and Housing Development Corporation Tucson, AZ $250,000 grant



Primary Care Development Corporation New York, NY $2,500,000 grant



Renaissance Economic Development Corporation New York, NY $300,000 grant



Rural Community Assistance Corporation Sacramento, CA $600,000 grant & $300,000 technical assistance



Sable Bancshares, Inc. Chicago, IL $1,000,000 equity investment



San Antonio Business Development Fund, Inc. San Antonio, TX $500,000 grant



Southern Dallas Development Corporation, Inc. Dallas, TX $600,000 grant



St. Luke Credit Union Windsor, NC $230,000 grant & $20,000 technical assistance



Tampa Bay Community Reinvestment Corporation Tampa, FL $2,500,000 grant



Tri-County Credit Union Ahoskie, NC $250,000 grant & $25,000 technical assistance



Unified Singers Federal Credit Union Thomasville, GA $250,000 grant & $21,000 technical assistance



Union Settlement Federal Credit Union New York, NY $200,000 grant



United Bank of Philadelphia Philadelphia, PA $500,000 grant



Vermont Community Loan Fund, Inc. Montpelier, VT $465,000 grant & $35,000 technical assistance



Vermont Development Credit Union Burlington, VT $500,000 grant



Washington County Council on Economic Development Washington, PA $250,000 grant



Wendell Phillips Community Development Federal Credit Union Minneapolis, MN $80,000 grant

  

CDFIs selected for funding under the Intermediary Component of the CDFI Program are:



National Association of Community Development Loan Funds Philadelphia, PA $1,750,000 grant



National Federation of Community Development Credit Unions New York, NY $3,250,000 grant

  

Insured depository institutions awarded under the BEA Program are:



American State Bank Osceola, AR $15,000



First National Bank of Phillips County Helena, AR $7,500



Simmons First National Bank Pine Bluff, AR $30,000



Bank of America Community Development Bank Walnut Creek, CA $915,333



California Korea Bank Los Angeles, CA $31,250



CenFed Bank Pasadena, CA $62,500



Chevron Credit Bank, N.A. Concord, CA $9,750



Citibank, F.S.B San Francisco, CA $740,156



City National Bank Los Angeles, CA $12,500



Community Bank of the Bay Oakland, CA $1,657,750



Fidelity Federal Bank Los Angeles, CA $250,000



Hanmi Bank Los Angeles, CA $25,000



People's Bank of California Los Angeles, CA $62,500



Republic Bank California, N.A. Beverly Hills, CA $52,618



Norwest Bank Colorado, National Association Denver, CO $165,000



Crestar Bank Washington, DC $464,607



Florida International Bank Miami, FL $13,968



Bank of America, N.T. & S.A. Chicago, IL $18,000



Cole Taylor Bank Wheeling, IL $29,480



Harris Trust and Savings Bank Chicago, IL $5,400



The Northern Trust Company Chicago, IL $425,500



The South Shore Bank of Chicago Chicago, IL $848,320



Republic Bank & Trust Company Louisville, KY $1,100



Central Bank Monroe, LA $37,500



First National Bank of Commerce New Orleans, LA $112,500



BankBoston Boston, MA $128,300



Cambridge Savings Bank Boston, MA $1,732



Wainwright Bank and Trust Company Boston, MA $60,385



Atlantic Bank, N.A. Portland, ME $15,000



Bath Savings Institution Bath, ME $8,250



Kennebunk Savings Bank Kennebunk, ME $12,000



Ocean National Bank Kennebunk, ME $4,500



Peoples Heritage Bank Portland, ME $30,000



Pepperell Trust Company Biddeford, ME $7,500



Central Bank of Kansas City Kansas City, MO $83,808



Trustmark National Bank Jackson, MS $150,000



Branch Banking and Trust Company Winston Salem, NC $330,000



Central Carolina Bank and Trust Company Durham, NC $550,000



First Union National Bank Charlotte, NC $948,750



NationsBank, National Association Charlotte, NC $545,600



Amalgamated Bank of New York New York, NY $16,200



Bankers Trust Company New York, NY $957,000



Citibank, N.A. New York, NY $2,517,024



Community Capital Bank Brooklyn, NY $168,796



European American Bank Uniondale, NY $1,547,285



Manufacturers and Traders Trust Company New York, NY $218,770



Republic National Bank New York, NY $371,550



Roosevelt Savings Bank Garden City, NY $2,250



The Chase Manhattan Bank New York, NY $960,205



Bank of America, FSB Portland, OR $755,349



First Bank of Beverly Hills, Portland, Oregon Portland, OR $19,254



Girard Savings Bank Portland, OR $98,100



Washington Federal Savings Bank Washington, PA $83,250



NationsBank of Texas, NA Dallas, TX $334,400



The San Benito Bank & Trust Company Arroyo, TX $15,000



(a unit of Pacific Southwest Bank)
