---
title: STATEMENT BY TREASURY SECRETARY ROBERT E. RUBIN
date: 1997-12-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2109
---
*(Archived Content)*

At the conclusion of the recent Senate hearings on the Internal Revenue Service, then-Acting Commissioner Mike Dolan requested a report on the use of enforcement statistics and collection tools. I have reviewed the first report on the actions of employees and managers in the Oklahoma/Arkansas District and I am seriously disturbed by its conclusions that an emphasis on statistical goals and expectations could have affected taxpayers' rights to fair treatment and employees' rights to a fair evaluation system. This is an unacceptable finding and one that demands strong action.

Recently the IRS has announced a number of actions designed to address the problem of reliance on statistics and the need to improve customer service. Those measures announced during the hearings and further steps taken last week target many of the problems raised in this report.

The report released today raises serious questions about the policy guidance given to employees and the use of enforcement statistics and collection tools. For that reason, the IRS has announced new, significant steps designed to ensure that, even as we seek to continue our work to change the culture of the IRS, we act quickly to protect taxpayer rights. I fully support Commissioner Rossotti in announcing these actions. These steps are an appropriate first response to these findings.

The recent, successful series of IRS Problem Solving Days produced an important reminder that the vast majority of IRS employees are committed to doing their jobs right and that most taxpayers seek only the chance for a fair hearing.
