---
title: DAVID W. WILCOX NAMED AS ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY FOR ECONOMIC POLICY
date: 1997-09-25
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr1954
---
*(Archived Content)*

President Clinton announced today his intention to nominate David W.Wilcox to be Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy.

Dr. Wilcox is currently a Senior Economist at the Federal Reserve Board in the Division of Monetary Affairs. Dr. Wilcox began his work with the Federal Reserve Board11 years ago in the Division of Research and Statistics and has also served as a SeniorEconomist with the Council of Economic Advisers. In his work with the Federal ReserveBoard, Dr. Wilcox focused on household spending and saving, monetary policy strategy, andissues related to the measurement of the cost of living.

As the Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy, Dr. Wilcox will serve asthe principal advisor to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary on a wide range of domesticeconomic policy issues. Among other responsibilities, he will participate in developingthe Administration’s official economic projections. Furthermore, in his new role, Dr.Wilcox will work closely with the Council of Economic Advisers, the Office of Managementand Budget, and other government agencies.

Dr. Wilcox received a Doctoral degree in Economics from the MassachusettsInstitute of Technology and graduated Magna Cum Laude from Williams College with aBachelor of Arts in Mathematics. Dr. Wilcox was raised in Winnetka, Illinois and currentlyresides in Alexandria, Virginia with his wife Melynda.
