---
title: GARY GENSLER CONFIRMED AS ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR FINANCIAL MARKETS
date: 1997-09-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr1941
---
*(Archived Content)*

  

The United States Senate voted today to confirm Gary Gensler as the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Financial Markets.

    

Mr. Gensler was most recently a partner of the international investment banking firm, The Goldman Sachs Group, L.P. Mr. Gensler joined Goldman Sachs in 1979 in the Mergers & Acquisition Department. In 1984, he assumed responsibility for the firm’s efforts advising media companies and was elected a partner in 1988. Mr. Gensler subsequently joined the firm’s Fixed Income Division and directed Goldman’s Fixed Income and Currency trading efforts in Tokyo. Since 1995, Mr. Gensler has been Co-head of Finance for Goldman Sachs worldwide.

  

As Assistant Secretary for Financial Markets, Mr. Gensler serves as a senior advisor to the Secretary of the Treasury in developing and implementing the Federal Government’s policies and plans for debt management and the sale of U.S. government securities. He advises on broad matters of Federal, State and local finance, including leading the Treasury’s participation in the financing of the District of Columbia. Mr. Gensler also serves as a senior member of the Treasury Financing Group and the Working Group on Financial Markets.

  

Mr. Gensler graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School in 1978 with a Bachelor of Science in Economics, where he also received a Master of Business Administration from the Graduate Division in 1979. He and his wife, Francesca Danieli, have three daughters and reside in New York City. Mr. Gensler was born in Baltimore, Maryland.
