---
title: PUBLICATION QUALITY PHOTOS AVAILABLE OF BLACK PATRIOT COMMEMORATIVE COIN CEREMONY
date: 1998-02-25
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2255
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin presented for the first time three Black Patriots commemorative coins in a ceremony at the National Archives Theater in Washington, D.C. Publication-quality digital photographs are available from this event on the World Wide Web. The site is www.treas.gov/press/.

Black Patriots Foundation President Wayne Smith, Co-Chair of the Foundation's Leadership Committee and Michael J. Walker an 8th grade student from Washington, D.C.'s Robert H. Terrell Junior High School, received the silver one dollar coins commemorating Black Revolutionary War Patriots.

The coins also commemorate the 275th anniversary of the birth of the first black Revolutionary War patriot, Crispus Attucks, who was the first American colonist killed by British troops during the Revolutionary period. The U.S. Mint is authorized by Public Law 104-329 to produce up to 500,000 one dollar silver coins. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the coins are authorized to be used to support the construction of the Black Patriots Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, D.C.

Photographs of Treasury events are posted daily including bilateral meeting, public events, officials and speeches. The website also contains a photo archive of pictures that are more than one week old.

All images are high resolution 300dpi jpeg -- suitable for magazines, newspapers, wire services, or television. These photographs are a public resource and can be used without cost.
