---
title: STATEMENT BY TREASURY SECRETARY ROBERT E. RUBIN ON RETIREMENT OF LEWIS C MERLETTI
date: 1998-11-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2815
---
*(Archived Content)*

Upon the announcement today of the retirement of Lewis C. Merletti as Director of the United States Secret Service, we gratefully acknowledge his leadership of the Secret Service and his many contributions to this nation.



Over the course of three decades, Lew Merletti has provided invaluable service to this Nation. After enlisting in the Army in 1967, Director Merletti served in Vietnam in the Special Forces. His citations include the Bronze Star and the Combat Medical Badge. He joined theSecret Service in 1974 and served in many posts critical to Secret Service's mission. Among other things, he was on the protective details of Presidents Reagan, Bush and Clinton and rose to be the Special Agent in Charge of the Presidential Protection Division. His service to Treasury extended beyond the Secret Service. He led the investigative team at Treasury that examined theWaco incident in 1993 and recommended internal reforms that proved invaluable.



The Secret Service plays a vital role in American law enforcement. Its responsibilities are as diverse as they are critical -- from protecting the President and Vice President, to protecting the currency from counterfeiting and other financial crimes investigations, to protecting the public through counter terrorism efforts.



A law enforcement bureau charged with these vital responsibilities requires a leader of great experience, judgment, and talent. Lew Merletti proved to be such a leader.



The Treasury Department will miss Director Merletti's long service and many contributions to this nation, and we wish him well in his future endeavors.
