---
title: International Support for Brazil
date: 1998-11-13
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2820
---
*(Archived Content)*

**1. IMF**--The IMF assistance to Brazil totals approximately $18 billion. The structure of the package is in line with the enhanced IMF facility proposed by President Clinton last month and recently endorsed by the G-7. Of the $18 b. total, 70% will be provided through a Supplemental Reserve Facility at interest rates 300-500 basis points above normal IMF lending rates, and 30% will be provided via a 3-year stand-by arrangement.

Total IMF contribution $18.0 billion First disbursement amount 
(After approval of Brazil's program by the IMF Executive Board) $5.25 billion
SRF-$4.25 billion
SBA-$0.75 billion Second disbursement amount
(Contingent on successful IMF review by February, 1999) $5.25 billion
SRF-$4.25 billion
SBA-$0.75 billion 

**2. Multilateral Development Banks**-- The World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank contributions will provide assistance to Brazil to support improved social safety nets and banking reform, among other things:

*includes $1.1 billion loan approved in Sept. 1998.
**includes $300 million of the $1.1 billion loan. World Bank IADB Total contribution $4.5 billion $4.5 billion* Disbursed by end-1998 $1.375 billion -- Disbursed by end-1999 $3.0 billion $3.7 billion** 

**3. Bilateral financing **-- Twenty countries will provide financing, in most cases to guarantee credits extended to Brazil by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). The total amount is approximately $14.5 billion, of which the U.S. contribution will be $5 billion. We anticipate the following countries will offer bilateral support.

Austria Greece Portugal Belgium Ireland Spain Canada Italy Sweden Denmark Japan Switzerland Finland Luxembourg U.K. France Netherlands U.S. Germany Norway
