---
title: '"The Global Economic Situation and the United States'' Approach" Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers Remarks to the Philadelphia Bar Association Philadelphia, PA'
date: 1998-10-14
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2755
---
*(Archived Content)*

Thank you. I am glad to be here to discuss the crises in emerging markets and the short and longer term challenges they present.



Let me start by underlining the importance of these issues to the United States. By wide agreement, what used to be called the Asian financial crisis is now a global financial market problem as serious as any the international community has faced since World War II. There has been what Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan has called a very dramatic change in the whole risk profile of the world -- with implications for every American.



The economic crises and large-scale withdrawal of capital from emerging markets in Asia, Russia and elsewhere have already affected US exports and the job growth that goes with those exports. More than a third of the world economy is already in recession and most others are revising downwards their growth forecasts.



Most recently -- and perhaps most troubling -- our own financial markets are now being seriously affected. In the wake of the Russian crisis in August, almost across the board financial institutions have been running toward quality and away from risk. As a result:


- even the most respected American companies are finding it more costly to raise funds on equity or debt markets
- major financial institutions are revising their profit estimates and downsizing their payrolls;
- banks are tightening capital standards and collateral requirements;
- and short-term financing is in vogue -- with important implications for consumer finance and home mortgages. American home buyers are not sharing in the benefits of lower short term interest rates. Since August the gap between the interest rate on a generic 30 year mortgage and treasuries has widened by nearly three-quarters of a percentage point.


That these events will affect the American financial system and our broader economy is not in doubt. The question is how large -- and long-lasting -- the impact will be. The passage of additional funding for the IMF is an important step toward containment and prevention -- and I am now very hopeful that we will finally see this achieved this week. But we have more to do to contain these problems and build a stronger global financial system for the next century.



I would like to spend most of my time today on the short and long-term imperatives we face in responding to these crises. But first, a word or two about some of the underlying causes.



I. Causes of the Crises



Like most financial problems, these difficulties have their roots in a combination of leverage and illiquidity. Absent borrowing on a substantial scale, the drying up of funds for borrowers is not a big problem. But equally, absent severe illiquidity, substantial borrowing is not a problem:


- we see this in the Asian economies, where inefficient financial systems, inadequate financial supervision and regulation and macroeconomic imbalances perpetuated a long period of excessive borrowing by financial institutions and companies -- and where citizens are now bearing the heavy economic costs of the withdrawal of that capital and evaporation of domestic liquidity.
- and we see the same problem at work in the institutions who now find themselves in serious trouble in crucial markets, where risk management systems that were thought to limit risks have turned out to have created them, and financial instruments that seemed to create liquidity in the good times seem now to be accelerating its withdrawal.


As several commentators have pointed out, financial historians would recognize in these problems the hallmarks of the traditional credit cycle. Exciting new investment opportunities beget credit expansion, beget excess borrowing, beget financial distress, and, ultimately, something approaching panic, as investors begin to think more and more about what other investors are thinking and less and about the underlying fundamentals.



So it is a classic credit cycle, but -- I would argue -- one with some late 20th century novelties:


- first, the problems have been aggravated by severe institutional and political problems in some of the emerging economies, notably in Indonesia and Russia, where economic emergence turns out to have outpaced the institutional capacity to carry out core functions -- such as tax collection and bank regulation -- and to implement key reforms.
- second, these old-style problems have been transmitted with unprecedented speed and force by new information technologies and financial instruments. Indeed, when we have now seen withdrawals of capital of more than 10 percent of GDP in some cases, and a trebling or more of bond yields in many disparate markets, it is difficult to believe that the contagion and generalized flight from risk has not been exaggerated.


II. The United States Approach



Our priority today is the same as it has been since the beginning of the crisis: to restore growth and confidence to the troubled economies and help prevent further contagion in international markets. As financial strains have increased so have we stepped up the pressure to forge a broad-based international response.



The core elements of a strategy for containing the immediate crisis are now broadly accepted among the G7 and were outlined by President Clinton in his remarks in New York last month and, most recently, during the Annual Meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund in Washington last week. This strategy rests on three pillars.



1. Strengthened policies in the major industrial economies.



With inflation low or falling in most parts of the world, and the consequent shift in the balance of risk in the global economy, we are working with our G-7 partners in an enhanced emphasis on implementing policies to promote sustainable global growth:


- the United States must continue to do its part, in particular by preserving the budget surplus and thus reducing pressure on global capital markets and on our own trade deficit.
- the countries of the European Union, just now emerging from a long period of relatively slow growth and high unemployment, must also take hold of the baton of supporting regional and global growth. Private forecasters are now suggesting that, as a result of these crises, our current account deficit could rise from 1.9 percent to 2.8 percent of GDP this year, or around $235 billion. By contrast, little or no change is expected in last year's current account surplus of the European continental economies of 1.8 percent of GDP, or roughly $110 billion.
- Japan, which even today accounts for more than two-thirds of the Asian economy, has the most important task of all. Immediate and effective measures to strengthen the financial system and strong fiscal action in Japan that provides a substantial and sustained economic stimulus are urgently needed for Japan to resume the strong domestically-driven recovery that it needs -- and for which the world has long waited. In recent days there have been encouraging steps with the passage of key banking reform legislation. But after so much delay, observers will be forgiven for waiting to see the speed and effectiveness of its implementation.


2. Effective policies in the countries most affected.



While the external environment is important and international support can make a difference, countries shape their own economic destiny. And no amount of external support will save a country if governments lack the will to take the steps needed to revive confidence at home.



That means sound macroeconomic policies aimed at the fastest possible return of growth. That means strong structural reforms to scale back crony capitalism and support the operation of markets. And it means policies that increase political stability and build the government's domestic credibility.



A special priority in recent months -- and a focus of United States efforts within the international financial institutions -- is to find ways to accelerate the pace of comprehensive corporate and financial restructuring in countries where there is a systemic problem. This is particularly pressing in Asia where the severe indebtedness of both the financial and corporate system is a serious barrier to recovery and where addressing the overhang of domestic debt is essential.



To be sure, as countries choose their policies and the IMF makes judgments about what types of programs it is willing to support financially, difficult questions of balance have inevitably arisen. For example, programs must balance the need to stabilize exchange rates that are in free-fall against the risks of raising interest rates significantly at a time when the banking and broader financial system is seriously strained. And they have to balance the need to address the structural defects associated with crony capitalism against the need to avoid the danger that large-scale restructuring will generate a domestic backlash.



These questions will no doubt continue to be debated and there is no guarantee that the IMF will get it right on every occasion. But in debating the response to these crises it is vital not to confuse the doctor with the disease. The distress and difficult outcomes being seen in Asia are not a consequence of IMF policies or IMF finance. These are, rather, the attempts to palliate the true cause of the distress: the withdrawal of private capital and declines in domestic confidence that led to that withdrawal.



This crisis is still a moving story. But it is encouraging that in those countries that were first hit and where policy has been most determined there have been signs of containment. By contrast, in countries such as Indonesia and Russia, where governments did not carry through on their policy programs, inflation, interest rates and output losses are still rising and the return of confidence is more remote.



Countries that have consistently followed policies that the IMF were able to endorse and support -- specifically, the Philippines, Korea and Thailand -- have begun to see signs of a return to stability. In Korea and Thailand the currencies have broadly stabilized, nominal interest rates are now close to single digits, and real interest rates have fallen to well below pre-crisis levels.



For his part President Cardoso's recognition of the importance of strong Brazilian policies going forward has been appropriate and encouraging and the international community has made clear its preparedness to support Brazil going forward.



3. Conditioned International Support



International support, centered around the IMF, is vital because even strong domestic policies can fail where markets are in a tailspin and countries lack the financial breathing space to implement reform. Financial crises have elements of a self-fulfilling prophecy -- like bank runs, everyone expects failure or everyone expects everyone else to expect failure, leading to a rush to be the first one out and thus causing failure. Temporary, conditioned support gives countries a bridge to overcome this self-fulfilling prophecy and help restore stability.



Adequate funding for the IMF is critical to all of these efforts. The IMF operates much like an international credit union. We and other countries provide a line of credit, and when the IMF draws on our commitments, we receive a liquid, interest bearing offsetting claim on the IMF. That is why there are no direct budget costs. That is why our contribution does not increase the deficit, or impact other spending priorities.



The IMF's resources are today at historic lows. And for some months now measures that would secure additional funding have been awaiting Congressional approval. But I am very hopeful that in the coming few days this issue will finally be resolved in ways that carry forward the reforms that the United States has already achieved at the IMF -- reforms that have made it more accountable, more transparent, more closely focused on growth, and better-placed to respond appropriately to new-style financial crises that begin in the capital account not the trade balance.



Going forward, we need to build on this new funding for the IMF to work to reinforce the capacity of the international community to provide financing to countries that are pursuing sound policies and are nonetheless affected by contagion. Where contagion is a serious concern the emphasis must be on finding new ways to make liquidity available and restore confidence which do not raise undue moral hazard effects.



We will also be working with the Multilateral Development Banks to provide substantially increased funding for social safety nets in the countries in crisis to help the least advantaged citizens in those countries who are experiencing hardship. As the President said recently, if we want these countries to do tough things, we have to protect the most defenseless people in the society and we have to protect people who get hurt when they didn't do anything wrong.



III. The Longer Term Challenge



The fires are still burning and the risks remain very real. But in the drive to forge an immediate response to these events we cannot afford to forget the longer term challenge they pose.



I am convinced that any effort to close down the global capital market in response to these events would make it worse rather than better. I am equally convinced that openness offers the surest route to increasing opportunity and prosperity around the world. But to say this is not to say that we must be happy with the global capital market we have now.



When the actions taken by one company or group of investors can mean that one day a worker on the other side of the world is going about his business, the next he has been thrown out of work, the price of his daily bread has tripled and his children are not in school but on the street -- when we are seeing scenes like these every day in the world in which we live, it is fairly clear that something has to give.



We have seen too many financial crises in these last years of the century, crises that have come at unacceptable costs for the people in the countries affected by them. Quite simply, if we do not find a way to do it better we will not in the next century have the truly global financial system in which we all have such an enormous stake.



To be sure, we don't yet have all the answers and some of those we do have continue to be a subject for debate. But there is now a broad consensus on three of the most important areas for reform. These were highlighted in concrete proposals put forward last week by international working groups involving finance ministries and central banks from key industrial and emerging nations that were established under President Clinton's leadership earlier this year:


- first, increased transparency and disclosure. If one were writing a history of the American capital market I would suggest to you that the single most important innovation shaping that capital market was the idea of generally accepted accounting principles. We need that internationally, and we need it at the level of individual companies and financial institutions.
- second, strengthened domestic financial systems. The Working Group began to outline new standards and principles for corporate governance, bank restructuring, deposit insurance, and foreign exchange and interest rate risk management. Now we must devise effective ways to support countries' efforts to implement these standards and provide incentives for those efforts to be significant.
- third, more effective burden-sharing arrangements in the response to financial difficulties, particularly at the domestic level, so as to reduce the scope for individual failures to become domestic, systemic failures -- and for national crises to become international ones. That means much-improved insolvency and debtor-creditor regimes and the inclusion of new creditor coordination clauses in bond contracts among debtors and creditors.


Going forward, we need to find new ways to deal effectively with the emergencies we have seen in recent months and the contagion that these can cause. We need to strengthen governments' capacity to opt for cooperation over costly, often counterproductive, unilateralism. And we must find ways to restore confidence and overcome collective action problems at the times when it is no one's interests to be last in the room -- but no one's interest to be crushed in a stampede out.



The problems we have seen in financial systems in the United States and other industrial economies over the years speak to the difficulty of addressing these issues effectively. And I don't need to remind this audience of the difficulties involved in making legal and regulatory reforms translate into improved behavior and making new institutions come to life. Due diligence is one thing. True diligence quite another. And when times are good it can be a brave financial officer who forces the chairman to look at the small print.



And yet, if these crises are a reminder of the challenge that these issues present, to industrial nations as well as emerging ones, they are no less a reminder of the critical importance of resolving them if we are to build the strong and stable, truly global economy in which we all have such an enormous stake. Supporting globalization and the benefits it offers is important. But it is not enough. If the global economy is to continue to grow and to realize its true potential we need to lay it on more stable foundations. And most critically, we need to make sure that it serves all of its members. Thank you.
