---
title: DONALD C. LUBICK CONFIRMED AS TREASURY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR TAX POLICY
date: 1998-02-13
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2225
---
*(Archived Content)*

The U.S. Senate voted yesterday to confirm Donald C. Lubick as the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Tax Policy. Lubick brings to the position an extensive background in federal tax policy, having held the same position during the Carter Administration.

Lubick had served as acting Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy since June 1996. From 1994 to 1996, he was the Department's director of the Tax Advisory Program for the Central and Eastern European countries and the former Soviet Union. Since 1992, as a member of a panel of experts on the Fiscal Affairs Department of the International Monetary Fund and a senior fellow with the Harvard Law School's International Tax Program, Lubick has participated in tax reform missions to Russia, Czechoslovakia and the Dominican Republic, among other countries.

Until 1994, Lubick was a partner with the law firm of Hodgson, Russ, Andrews, Woods & Goodyear, where he had been since 1981, as well as from 1950 to 1961 and 1964 to 1977. In both interims, Lubick served at the Treasury. He was Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy from 1978 to 1981. Prior to his 1978 appointment, he served as Deputy Assistant Secretary and Acting Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy. From 1961 to 1964, he was the Department's Tax Legislative Counsel.

A graduate of Harvard University Law School and the University of Buffalo, Lubick is a member of the American Law Institute and a past member of the Advisory Group to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue. He formerly chaired the American Bar Association's Committee on Domestic Relations Tax Problems.

Lubick and his wife, Susan, have three children, Jonathan, Caroline and Lisa.
