---
title: FIRST CITIZEN ADVOCACY PANEL LOOKING FOR MEMBERS
date: 1998-02-26
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2258
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin and Internal Revenue Service Commissioner Charles O. Rossotti today announced the formation of Citizen Advocacy Panels, designed to provide independent monitoring of the quality of IRS customer service and to make recommendations to improve that service. The first citizen panel, based in the IRS's South Florida district, is beginning its search for taxpayers to serve as volunteer members.



The panels are being established nationwide, with the first four rolling out this year. In addition to the first panel in Ft. Lauderdale, citizen panels will be established in Brooklyn, Milwaukee, and Seattle.



Panel members will be identified through an independent, structured application process, aimed at a balanced membership and representation of a cross-section of the taxpaying public within the district in which the panel resides. The Secretary of the Treasury will make final selections from identified candidates.



The citizen advocacy panels are a significant step in our effort to reform the IRS, said Secretary Rubin. These independent panels, together with a stronger Taxpayer Advocate at the IRS, will make it easier for taxpayers to get problems addressed quickly and effectively and will help the IRS to identify ways in which customer service can be improved to prevent additional problems.



President Clinton announced last October the concept of the new, locally-based citizen panels whose mission is to:


- provide citizen input into enhancing IRS customer service by identifying problems and making recommendations for improvement of IRS systems and procedures;
- elevate identified problems to the appropriate IRS official, and monitor the progress to effect change; and
- refer individual taxpayers to the appropriate IRS office for assistance in resolving their problems.


Commissioner Rossotti said he looks forward to receiving the input the citizen panels will provide. This type of cooperative panel is a win-win for everyone, said Rossotti. Not only can the IRS benefit from the fresh perspective of our service as seen through our customers' eyes, but this kind of grassroots involvement also gives the public an opportunity to participate in government decision-making.



Last month, Rossotti unveiled a new concept of modernized operations for the IRS to deliver significantly improved service, based on looking at IRS operations from the taxpayers' perspective. We have to start looking at everything we do from the outside in -- the citizens' panels fit in perfectly with that concept Rossotti said.



Each panel will consist of seven members serving two-year terms. The only government representative will be the IRS district's Taxpayer Advocate. No former IRS employees will be allowed to serve on the panels, and only one panel member may be a professional tax practitioner. Panel members will not be paid, but will be reimbursed for their travel expenses.



Members of the first four citizen panels are being solicited by Booz-Allen & Hamilton.
