---
title: WHITE HOUSE Y2K CHIEF TO SPEAK AT TREASURY PARTNERSHIP/IT CONFERENCE
date: 1998-07-17
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2601
---
*(Archived Content)*

Chairman of the President's Council on the Year 2000 Conversion John Koskinen will be the keynote speaker at the Treasury Department's annual Partnerships/IT Conference. The conference will be held from 7:30 a.m. until 4 p.m. on Tuesday through Thursday, July 21-23, at the International Trade Center, Ronald Reagan Building, 1300 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.



During the three-day conference small, minority and women-owned businesses will have the opportunity to meet with Treasury representatives, small and large business prime contractors and other government agencies to discuss doing business with the federal government. IT (information technology) professionals will be able to learn state of the art information technology used at the Treasury Department.



Treasury bureaus and industry leaders will showcase and demonstrate products all three days, including Secret Service's display of the ALERT vehicle and ATF's display of the Mobil Command Post, Rapid Response Laboratory and National Response Team Vehicle; and FinCEN's presentation of Artificial Intelligence technology to detect suspicious financial transactions and money laundering activities.



Conference speakers will include:


- Chairman of the President's Council on the Year 2000 Conversion John Koskinen Wednesday, July 22, 10-10:45 a.m., Atrium Ballroom
- Netscape co-founder and Executive Vice President Marc Andreesen Wednesday, July 22, 11-11:45 a.m., Amphitheater
- Former POW and author Col. Edward L. Hubbard USAF (Ret.) Wednesday, July 22, 9-9:50 a.m., Atrium Ballroom
- Dr. Victor Lawrence, Lucent Technologies, Bell Labs Innovations Thursday, July 23, 9-9:45 a.m., Atrium Ballroom
- Treasury Assistant Secretary for Management and Chief Financial Officer Nancy Killefer Thursday, July 23, 10-10:45 a.m., Atrium Ballroom
- CICSO Systems Chief Science Officer Dr. Bruce Nelson Thursday, July 23, 1-1:45 p.m., Amphitheater
- The Washington Post's Editor of The Federal Diary Mike Causey Thursday July 23, 12:30-12:45 p.m., Atrium Ballroom
- Treasury Chief Information Officer Jim Flyzik Thursday, July 23, 2-3 p.m., Atrium Ballroom


The conference including all seminars and sessions is open to the media without registration. Individuals attending the conference must be registered to attend the seminars and sessions. Exhibits and showcases are open to the public without registration. For conference and registration information, please see the Treasury website at www.treas.gov.conference.



Media wishing to attend should call the Federal Small Business Technology Council at (301) 206-2940, ext. 212 with name and affiliation.
