---
title: TREASURY CALLS FOR LARGE POSITION REPORTS
date: 1998-06-08
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2494
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Treasury is calling for Large Position Reports from those entities whose reportable position in the 5.5% Treasury Notes of February 2008 equals or exceeds $2.5 billion as of close of business Friday, June 5, 1998. This call for Large Position Reports is a test. Entities with reportable positions in this 10-year note equal to or exceeding this $2.5 billion threshold must report these positions to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Entities with reportable positions below $2.5 billion are not required to file Large Position Reports. Reports, which must include the required position and administrative information, must be received by the Market Reports Division of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York before noon Eastern time on Friday, June 12, 1998. Large Position Reports may be filed by facsimile at (212) 720-8028 or delivered to the Bank at 33 Liberty Street, 4th floor.

  **Details on Call for Large Position Reports Security Description: ** 5.5% Treasury Notes of February 2008, Series B-2008 ** CUSIP Number: ** 912827 3X 8 ** CUSIP Number of STRIPS Principal Component: ** 912820 CQ 8 ** Maturity Date: ** February 15, 2008 ** Date for Which Information Must Be Reported: ** June 5, 1998 as of COB ** Large Position Reporting Threshold: ** $2.5 Billion (Par Value)** Date Report Is Due:** June 12, 1998, before noon Eastern time

This call for large position information is made under Treasury's large position reporting rules (17 CFR Part 420). The notice calling for Large Position Reports is also being published in theFederal Register. This press release and a copy of[a sample Large Position Report](http://www.publicdebt.treas.gov/gsr/gsrclrpt.htm), which appears in Appendix B of the rules at 17 CFR Part 420, can be obtained from Treasury's automated fax system by calling (202) 622-2040 and requesting document number 2494. These documents are also available at the Bureau of the Public Debt's Internet site at the following address:[http://www.publicdebt.treas.gov](http://www.publicdebt.treas.gov/).

Questions about Treasury's large position reporting rules should be directed to Public Debt's Government Securities Regulations Staff at (202) 219-3632. Questions regarding the method of submission of Large Position Reports may be directed to the Market Reports Division of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at (212) 720-8021.
