---
title: PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF HISPANIC FEDERAL EXECUTIVES AND THE DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
date: 1998-04-21
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr22871
---
*(Archived Content)*

**I. PARTIES** The parties to this Partnership Agreement (PA) are the National Association of Hispanic Federal Executives (NAHFE) and the Department of Treasury (Treasury). **II. BACKGROUND** NAHFE is a - 501(c)(6) private, nonprofit and nonpartisan professional organization of Federal supervisors, managers, and executives. NAHFE was incorporated in Washington, D.C. in 1984. Membership is open to all federal civilian and military personnel at the GS-12 (equivalent military rank is major) and above grade levels, including personnel at the Senior Executive Service level.

The objectives of NAHFE are to:

- promote the federal government as an excellent source of opportunity and service
- recruit diverse qualified candidates for senior policy positions in federal civil service
- provide career development training to federal supervisors, managers, and executives for enhanced job effectiveness and career progression
- provide intermediary services between the government and Hispanic American communities.

**III. PURPOSE IV. OBJECTIVE AND RESPONSIBILITIES** The objective of this PA is to coordinate and facilitate activities that are responsive to the needs of the parties, within the limits set forth herein.

A. The responsibilities of NAHFE are to:

- Provide, upon request from Treasury, information, counsel, support, and assistance regarding policies and programs which further the purpose and objective of this PA.
- Provide Treasury with input on ways to increase involvement of Hispanic Americans in educational programs as outlined in Executive Order No.12900, Educational Excellence for Hispanic Americans.
- Provide Treasury, upon request, NAHFE speakers on such topics as diversity, Hispanic issues, affirmative action programs, and contemporary issues affecting Hispanic Americans.
- Provide Treasury with access to the NAHFE membership database for recruitment of Hispanic Americans.
- Provide Treasury with access to the NAHFE home page on the Internet World Wide Web for use in disseminating relevant information to the Hispanic American community.
- Provide Treasury with information regarding procedures for advertising in The Hispanic Executive, the official newsletter of NAHFE.
- Provide Treasury with information relating to participation in the NAHFE Annual Executive Leadership Development and Diversity Training and Recruitment Conference in November and seminars held in the Southwest.

B. The responsibilities of the Department of the Treasury are to:

- Encourage the use of Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) and other similar programs for the professional development of Hispanic Americans.
- Receive input from NAHFE on ways to increase Hispanic American involvement in Treasury programs and activities.
- Provide NAHFE, upon request, copies of public reports which support this PA's objectives and are submitted to the Office of Personnel Management, the White House Initiative on Educational Excellence for Hispanic Americans, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, or the Merit System Protection Board.
- Include NAHFE on existing mailing lists for vacancy announcements for GS-13 to GS-15 and SES positions.
- Include NAHFE on existing mailing lists for information on Treasury procurement opportunities.
- Provide NAHFE with information regarding procedures for obtaining surplus property and computer equipment.
- Encourage Treasury bureaus to participate in events designed to recruit and promote Hispanic Americans in the federal workplace: for example, the NAHFE Annual Executive Leadership Development and Diversity Training and recruitment Conference in November and seminars in the Southwest.

**V. IMPLEMENTATION PLAN** Each party will designate an individual to serve as a liaison and point of contact in implementing this PA. The parties' representatives will develop recommendations on ways in which this PA can best serve the parties' interests within 60 days from the effective date of this PA. **VI. FUNDING** Nothing herein will be construed as obligating Treasury or NAHFE to expend any funds to achieve the purposes and objectives of this PA. **VII. AMENDMENTS AND TERMINATION** This PA may be amended or terminated at any time by written notice of either party. **VIII. AUTHORITY** This PA is entered into pursuant to 5 CFR Part 251. **IX. EFFECTIVE DATE  The Partnership Agreement will become effective upon signature of the parties.**
