---
title: TREASURY PROHIBITS IMPORTATION OF CERTAIN SEMIAUTOMATIC ASSAULT RIFLES
date: 1998-04-06
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2347
---
*(Archived Content)*

**New Prohibition Applies to Rifles that Accept Large Capacity Military Magazines ** Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin announced today a prohibition on theimportation of modified, semiautomatic assault rifles with the ability to accept large capacitymilitary magazines.

Today's announcement follows a comprehensive review of the importation ofapproximately 59 modified, semiautomatic assault rifles conducted by Treasury and its Bureau ofAlcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF). The review was directed by President Clinton andSecretary Rubin last November, and stemmed from concerns that many new, dangeroussemiautomatic weapons had been developed in the nearly 10 years since the last review.

President Clinton and this Administration are committed to rigorous enforcementof laws designed to keep dangerous weapons off our streets, said Rubin. With thisdecision, we can further reduce the flow of weapons that have no legitimate use in oursociety.

Under the 1968 Gun Control Act, the Treasury Department is required to restrict theimportation of firearms unless they are determined to be particularly suitable for or readilyadaptable to sporting purposes.

In 1989, the sporting purposes provision led ATF to ban the importation ofseveral semiautomatic versions of assault weapons possessing military features such as bayonetmounts, pistol grips, night sights and grenade launchers. After the 1989 prohibition, certainsemiautomatic assault rifles that had failed the sporting purposes test were modified to remove allmilitary features except the ability to accept a large capacity military magazine (LCMM) thatholds more than 10 rounds. The LCMM rifles are models based on AK-47, FN-FAL, HK 91 and93, Uzi and SIG SG550 military assault rifles.

This review concluded that the original prohibition is correct and that military-stylesemiautomatic rifles are not importable. This review further concluded that firearms with theability to accept a large capacity magazine designed and produced for a military assault weaponshould be banned. The review draws support from Congress and the Administration's 1994decision to ban large capacity military magazines on the grounds that they servedcombat-functional ends and were attractive to criminals.

We have no desire to take guns away from hunters, or other legitimate users. Wedo, however, want to protect Americans from the violence that can result from thesesemiautomatic weapons, said Rubin.

Up to 1.6 million firearms whose importation had been suspended during the review maybe affected by this decision. Importers will be notified of this decision in writing and given anopportunity to respond.

The Study on the Sporting Suitability of Modified Semiautomatic Assault Rifles isavailable through the Treasury Public Affairs Office at (202) 622-2960 or via the Internet at[http://www.atf.gov/](http://www.atf.gov/)after12:00 p.m. EDT Monday, April 6.
