---
title: Department of the Treasury Community Development Financial Institutions Fund Fiscal Year 1997 Annual Report
date: 1998-02-23
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/cdfi97
---
*(Archived Content)*

## Department of the Treasury

## CommunityDevelopmentFinancialInstitutionsFund

## Fiscal Year 1997Annual Report

## Table of Contents

**Vision and Mission Statements 5 Message from the Director 7 Message from the Chief Financial Officer 9 Executive Summary and Highlights 11 Organizational Profile 13 Program Discussion and Analysis 17 Financial Discussion and Analysis 29 Reports from the Auditors 35 Financial Statements 48 Notes to the Financial Statements 52 Appendices 61 Management Officials and Advisory Board Members 75**

 

*Vision *

Implement a new direction for community development initiatives, by using limited public resources to invest in and build the capacity of the private sector to address the community development financing needs of distressed communities and disadvantaged populations. This will:

- unleash large amounts of private capital;take full advantage of private sector human talent, energy and creativity;revitalize neighborhoods;encourage and promote entrepreneurs;restore healthy private market activity in distressed communities; andempower local residents.

 

*Mission *

Promote economic revitalization and community development through investment in and assistance to community development financial institutions (CDFIs) and through encouraging insured depository institutions to increase lending, financial services and technical assistance within distressed communities and to invest in CDFIs.

*Message from the Director *

 

The Community Development Banking and Financial Institutions Act of 1994 created a Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) Fund to promote economic revitalization and community development through investment in and assistance to community development financial institutions. Our activities are intended to provide greater access to capital for urban, rural, and Native American communities that face serious social and economic problems.

The institutions we support make a difference in communities all across the country. Our funds are used to leverage substantial private sector dollars into these communities and create replicable models for poverty alleviation through economic growth. Investment in businesses, housing, commercial real estate, human development, and urban activities that promote long-term economic and social viability are critical to our well being as a country. As a result of the Fund’s investments in institutions serving the underserved, we make economic independence a reality for many more people.

The Fund faced many challenges as it established itself, developing policy and programs with limited staff. Through the end of fiscal year 1997, the Fund has made 79 awards totaling over $75 million to CDFIs across the country, and 92 awards totaling $30 million to banks and thrifts for their efforts in providing creative loans, financial assistance and investments in distressed communities. In January 1997, the Fund managed the first Presidential Awards for Excellence in Microenterprise Development.

As the Fund has evolved so has its staff. In November 1997, Paul Gentille joined our staff as our Deputy Director for Management and CFO. Paul has had a long career in the Federal Government and brings much experience to his role. Our counsel, Maurice Jones, has recently become Deputy Director for Policy and Programs.

In January 1998, I joined the Fund as its second Director. I have a long-term commitment to community development and our basic operating premise — that small amounts of federal dollars can stimulate significant private sector investment in poor communities. We are currently building our team and organizational structure, and plan to have a full staff on board by the end of the fiscal year. Working with our two Deputy Directors will be a cadre of professionals, able to implement our programs prudently and think creatively, as we move forward to further our mission.

The CDFI industry faces many challenges as it grows and strives to increase its impact. I believe the Fund will facilitate that growth through training and technical assistance initiatives beginning later this year. We will also study the impact of the Fund’s investments and engage the community development field through a variety of outreach and communications efforts.

**I look forward to building our staff, growing our programs, and ensuring the taxpayer’s investment in the Fund catalyzes significant economic activity in distressed communities.**

I look forward to building our staff, growing our programs, and ensuring the taxpayer’s investment in the Fund catalyzes significant economic activity in distressed communities.

Ellen W. LazarDirector

 

*Message from the CFO *

As CFO and a part of a newly appointed management team, I am very pleased to present the fiscal years 1997, 1996 and 1995 audited financial statements for the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund.

These statements, representing the Fund's first efforts to prepare stand-alone financial statements, were audited by KPMG Peat Marwick LLP, and their audit resulted in an unqualified opinion for the Fund. What appeared impossible a few months ago, became a reality through the tireless efforts of a small, but extremely dedicated staff. To them I give a special thank you!

This opinion, along with the auditor's recommendations, now establishes a benchmark for the Fund's financial management and awards administration and monitoring. With a vision towards working better and costing less, the Fund's financial and program personnel will work together in partnership to further strengthen the Fund's management accountability and controls. Together we will ensure the integrity of information, make decisions, and measure performance to achieve desirable outcomes and real cost effectiveness.

We are firmly committed to excellence in all aspects of financial management and awards administration and monitoring. With the addition of new staff, we will focus on attaining a new level of efficiency and quality in the Fund's awards management, with emphasis on quality and customer service. Communicating with applicants and award recipients through the Internet and a CDFI Fund web site will be a priority during fiscal year 1998. We will also strive to have readily available reliable information on the Fund's financial condition, operations and awards programs as well as the performance and costs of these activities. Using a results-oriented management approach, we will enhance our strategic planning process, establish performance measures focused on "outcomes," and link performance information to resource requirements through annual performance plans.

Faced with the many challenges associated with a new and growing organization, our new management team is promoting a forward thinking approach to meet our future challenges and commitments. We are promoting a strong partnership between the Fund's program and management staffs, recognizing that our customers and employees are the most important resources for planning and decision-making processes inherent in carrying out our mission. At the end of each day, our commitment to the sound stewardship of the Fund's financial resources will remain our highest priority.

Paul R. GentilleDeputy Director for Managementand Chief Financial Officer

*Executive Summary *

The Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) Fund is working to expand access to credit and financial services in poor urban, rural and Native American communities, where one of the biggest obstacles to economic development is a lack of access to mainstream sources of private sector capital. Access to capital is an essential ingredient for creating and retaining jobs, developing affordable housing, revitalizing neighborhoods, and building local economies.

The CDFI Fund represents a new direction for community development initiatives by leveraging limited public resources to invest in and build the capacity of private sector institutions to finance community development needs in distressed communities.

In only two years, the CDFI Fund has made a significant contribution to increasing access to private sector capital, effectively promoting partnerships between community based financial institutions, banks and other private sector players, and leveraging scarce Federal resources into private dollars for credit starved communities.

Currently operating three programs - the CDFI Program, the Bank Enterprise Award (BEA) Program, and the Microenterprise Program - the Fund is helping to create jobs, rebuild neighborhoods, and restore hope in communities across the nation.

 

*Highlights*- *The CDFI Fund awarded 48 community organizations a total of $38.3 million in financial and technical assistance in the 1997 round of the CDFI Program. **The CDFI Fund awarded 54 insured depository institutions a total of $16.5 million in grants in the 1997 round of the BEA Program.**On January 30, 1997 President Clinton presented the inaugural Presidential Awards for Excellence in Microenterprise Development, recognizing programs that have provided opportunities to people who lack access to traditional credit sources, such as women, minorities and low-income Americans.*

*Organizational Profile *

The Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) Fund was authorized as part of the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994. In July of 1995, CDFI Fund, a wholly owned government corporation, was placed within the Department of the Treasury.

 

**Organization Chart**The offices of the CDFI Fund are located in Washington, D.C., where major policies and programs are developed and implemented in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. The Fund executive structure consists of a Director, Deputy Director for Policy and Programs, Deputy Director for Management/Chief Financial Officer, Legal Counsel and External Affairs Officer.

The Office of Management includes the functions of Awards Administration and Monitoring, Financial Management and Administrative Services. The Office of Policy and Programs includes the CDFI Program, BEA Program, Technical Assistance, Training and Other Programs, and Policy and Research.

The CDFI Fund Advisory Board consists of 15 members. Membership includes the Secretary or designee of the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Housing and Urban Development, Interior, and Treasury; the Administrator or designee of the Small Business Administration; and nine private citizens, appointed by the President.

Funding Summary

 

**Sources of Funds Since the first period of operation in FY 1995, the Fund has received annual appropriations of $50 million for FY 1995, $45 million for FY 1996, $50 million for FY 1997, and $80 million for FY 1998. The appropriations have two-year obligation authority, therefore the total budget authority available for use by the CDFI Fund in FY 1997 was $95 million, which included $45 million carried over from FY 1996. Of the amounts appropriated to the Fund, not more than $5,550,000 may be used by the Fund in each fiscal year to pay the administrative costs and expenses of the Fund. Uses of Funds The CDFI Fund incurred obligations of $59.5 million during FY 1997. Of that amount $5.5 million was obligated for the Fund's administrative and management expenses.***Program Analysis and Discussion*

Delaware ValleyCommunity Reinvestment FundPhildelphia, Pennsylvania

 

A national leader in developing innovative strategies to serve and stabilize disinvested communities, Deleware Valley Community Reinvestment Fund serves the most distressed neighborhoods in Camden, New Jersey, and Philadelphia and Chester, Pennsylvania. With its strong track record of financing affordable housing and small businesses, this CDFI’s asset base has grown 25% in the past year to $21 million and has attracted more than 700 investors from the private, non-profit, and public sectors. The $2 million investment by the CDFI Fund will be used to significantly expand the total number and dollar amount of Delaware Valley’s lending and investment activities.

AppalbancBerea, Kentucky

 

A multifaceted CDFI that serves 85 extremely distressed counties in West Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia, Appalbanc has developed an effective strategy to promote housing development and homeownership. Since its inception, Appalbanc and its affiliates have financed the development or rehabilitation of more than 20,000 homes. The $1.33 million in assistance provided by the CDFI Fund will be used to expand Appalbanc’s activities in this very needy region.

First AmericanCredit UnionWindow Rock, Arizona

 

Activities which serve Native American reservations throughout Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah illustrate how the CDFI Fund’s resources will generate economic activity in under-served communities. The basic financial services provided by the credit union include checking and savings accounts and consumer and home improvement loans for people who otherwise would have no access to these services. The Fund’s assistance will be used to expand lending and introduce ATM services to rural, sparsely settled low-income communities.

CommunityCapital Bank

Brooklyn, New York

 

Community Capital Bank provides business, housing, and commercial loans to projects in distressed communities throughout New York City. In the first six months of 1996, Community Capital Bank provided nearly $2.6 million in loans for small business development and affordable housing construction and support for entrepreneurial development initiatives among public housing residents. Community Capital Bank was awarded $215,461 for increasing its lending activities during this period.

Central Bankof Kansas City

Kansas City, Missouri

 

Central Bank was awarded $99,869 for increasing its deposit-taking activities and consumer and commercial real estate, housing, and business loans in distressed neighborhoods. During the first six months of 1996, this bank provided more than $8.3 million in loans and services. In addition to facilitating neighborhood redevelopment through its single- and multi-family housing activities, the bank made a significant loan to help a major manufacturer and employer remain in the community.

During FY 1997, the Fund continued to operate two key programs: the Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) Program and the Bank Enterprise Award (BEA) Program. In addition, the Microenterprise Program, a non-monetary award program inaugurated in FY 1996 was continued.

 

**Community Development Financial Institutions Program**The CDFI Fund makes investments in and provides technical assistance to Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs). The Fund seeks to enhance the capacity of CDFIs to address unmet community development finance needs in distressed communities.

 

CDFIs are private for-profit and non-profit financial institutions with community development as their primary mission and include community development banks, community development credit unions, non-profit loan funds, microenterprise loan funds, and community development venture capital funds.

 

The CDFI Fund may provide financial assistance in the form of equity investments, grants, loans, or deposits. The Fund may also provide technical assistance. All financial assistance provided by the Fund must be matched on at least a one-to-one basis with funds from sources other than the Federal government. Matching funds must be at least comparable in form and value to the assistance provided by the Fund.

 

Generally, assistance from the Fund is used to build each institution’s capacity and expand its lending, investment, or other community development activities.

 

Institutions seeking assistance submit an application to the Fund, which includes a comprehensive business plan covering not less than five years. Applicants are awarded assistance on a competitive basis, with selection criteria that includes the quality of their business plan,the extent and nature of community development impact, and the applicant's management team experience and background.

 

Organizations selected for an award enter into an Assistance Agreement with the Fund, which includes performance goals based on their comprehensive business plan.

 

The CDFI Fund’s ability to leverage private sector funds into distressed communities is dramatic. The $37.2 million in assistance awarded to CDFIs in the first round (FY 1996) will leverage approximately three to four times that amount in new capital over the next several years and generate approximately $400 million in new community development activity over the next decade.

 

For the 31 institutions funded in the first round of the Program, more than $50 million of matching money from non-Federal sources was raised. Seventy-two percent of these institutions derivedallof their matching funds from private sources (such as banks, corporations, foundations, and individuals). Nineteen percent of the institutions raised between 70% and 99% of the matching funds from private sources. Only three institutions raised less than 70% of their matching monies from private sources.

 

Unlike programs in which resources are provided for specific projects, under the CDFI Program, the Fund invests in CDFIs as institutions in order to promote the long-term viability of these financial institutions to serve distressed communities.

**Bank Enterprise Award Program**The BEA Program provides awards to insured depository institutions that increase their financial support of CDFIs and their lending and services in distressed neighborhoods. Awards are determined on the basis of the total dollar value of increased activity within an evaluation period. Award amounts range from 5 to 15 percent of the dollar value of the increased activity, depending on the type of activity. Awards are made after activities have been successfully implemented.

 

Eligible institutions submit applications to the CDFI Fund, which selects awardees based on various criteria, including: the activity in which they propose to engage and the total dollar amount of new activity generated during an evaluation period. Eligible activities include providing financial or technical assistance to CDFIs, as well as lending, financial or other services in neighborhoods with a poverty rate of at least 30 percent and an unemployment rate that is at least one and one half times the national average.

 

Applicants that are competitive and successful in undertaking their proposed activities will receive an award after their activities have been completed.

 

In 1996, the Fund made a total of $13.1 million in awards which leveraged nearly $66 million of private sector money for the benefit of 49 CDFIs--as well as generated $60 million in new lending and financial services targeted to some of the nation’s most distressed neighborhoods.

 

In 1996, 38 institutions, based in 18 states and the District of Columbia, received awards in the first funding round. These institutions include a wide range of financial institutions--including national banks, state-chartered commercial banks, federal savings banks, and thrifts--ranging in asset size from $21 million to more than $320 billion.

 

In 1997, 54 insured depository institutions were selected to receive a total of $16.5 million in grants. These institutions were headquartered in 17 states and the District of Columbia, with activities reaching many more communities across the nation.

 

**Microenterprise Award Program**The Presidential Awards for Excellence in Microenterprise Development reflect an on-going commitment by the Administration to advance the role that microenterprise development plays in enhancing economic opportunities for all Americans, especially those who have lacked access to traditional sources of credit such as women, low income people, and minorities. By recognizing outstanding microenterprise organizations, these non-monetary awards bring wider public attention to the important role and successes of microenterprise development in the domestic economy.

 

Winners of Presidential Awards were selected through a rigorous two-stage review process. A key element of the review process was involvement of a team of 20 nationally recognized experts on microenterprise from the public, private and non-profit sectors. The evaluations, advice, and recommendations of these experts helped the Fund select the first round award winners.

**Program Measures and Statistics BETHEX FEDERAL
CREDIT UNION
Bronx, New York **

Bronx, New York

**The Borrower**Ms. Lamont has a home-based business—"Full Potential"—designing and manufacturing high-fashion hats. Over the past eighteen months Ms. Lamont has seen a significant increase in business culminating in a contract with the national clothing retailer, J. Crew. In 1997, Ms. Lamont approached Bethex for a $15,000 working capital loan to purchase supplies to meet the obligations of the contract with J. Crew. After only three years of operations, she had proven to be a successful self-made entrepreneur, but now needed help to meet her contractual obligations and for the business to reach its next level of growth. Ms. Lamont enrolled in an entrepreneurial training class and subsequently applied for a loan with Bethex. Bethex was impressed with the thoroughness of Ms. Lamont’s business plan, her well organized business records and excellent credit history. As a result, the loan was granted.

One of the short term marketing goals outlined in the business plan was to show her merchandise, in-person, at a major retail store—what is known as a "trunk show." In October, 1997 that goal was realized through a trunk show at Bloomingdales in New York City. Without the success of the J. Crew contract, which was able to be honored through the loan from Bethex, an invitation to that show would not likely have happened. Ms. Lamont now has four seasonal employees in her burgeoning millinery operation.

**Bethex FCU**The South Bronx is one of the country’s most distressed communities. Despite the area’s troubles, Bethex Federal Credit Union has been a steady and constant source of credit, and more importantly of hope, for hundreds of low-income families. Founded in 1970 by welfare recipients, Bethex serves these low-income residents who have generally lacked access to conventional banking services. Over time, Bethex has grown from a institution that provided only the most basic financial services: savings accounts, very small loans and selling money orders, into a full-service financial institution now making business loans of up to $15,000.

The South Bronx contains some of the highest concentrations of poverty in the New York City metropolitan area, as well as the country. The typical family income is approximately one-third of the median family income for the New York City area. Bethex’ service area and its membership is heavily (approximately 60%) Hispanic, primarily of Puerto Rican and Dominican background. African Americans comprise about 40% of its membership. For residents of the South Bronx, the general absence of conventional financial services has been filled, in part, by other sources of "credit" with extraordinary interest rates, including pawn shops and loan sharks.

**The CDFI Fund Award**Bethex received a $100,000 grant from the CDFI Fund to expand its financial services and increase its business lending. Since the Fund’s investment, Bethex has been able to granting more loans, larger loans and accept more risk in its lending. Over the past 18 months Bethex’ membership has grown from 1,270 to 3,000, and its assets have increased from $1.6 million to $3 million. The increase in membership is a result of the expansion of financial services—Bethex now offers ATM cards, direct deposit and checking accounts.

In addition, over the last year, Bethex has launched a "School Banking" program. This program encourages savings among the youth of the community and is an important tool for teaching money management skills. Once common in New York City public schools, this program has not been as frequently utilized in recent years. Currently, Bethex has 550 "school accounts" from third, fourth and fifth graders at two public schools located in the Bronx.

Joy Cousminer, Treasurer/Manager of Bethex, notes that receiving the award from the CDFI Fund "has made us famous." Since Bethex received their award many commercial banks and thrifts have made non-member deposits and have offered a variety of technical support to the credit union.

* *

* *

* *

**ACCION TEXAS
San Antonio, Texas **

San Antonio, Texas

**The Borrower**Andrew Fuentes was too ill to return to his construction job and his family’s money was dwindling. At his wife’s suggestion, he made a table and set of chairs for their empty kitchen out of some old wood. This project, which had a unique, hand hewn look, made Andrew realize his creative potential. Soon afterward, he was selling his "blue fence" furniture to friends and began making furniture full-time. Andrew approached several local banks for a loan, but was turned down because of his credit history. By the time he heard about ACCION Texas, Andrew was too discouraged to apply for a loan. Andrew’s wife encouraged him. "Let’s try it!" she said. But Andrew declined fearing his request would be rejected. Eventually, he applied for and received a loan from ACCION Texas. He used the $3,000 loan to buy more inventory. He filled his shop with furniture and his sales doubled. "Without ACCION," Andrew stated, "we never could have made it."**ACCION Texas**The decision to launch ACCION Texas was based on a 1993 market study carried out by ACCION International of San Antonio’s Westside micro- and small business sector. The survey of 120 microentrepreneurs included owners of small restaurants and grocery stores, plumbers, electricians, painters, seamstresses, jewelry-makers, house cleaners, home day-care providers, and flea market vendors. These icroentrepreneurs expressed a need for credit, but were unable to access traditional financing. ACCION Texas was created to give these entrepreneurs access to financing and to other business support services. Of the San Antonio Westside micro-business owners surveyed, 83% had never tried to obtain a bank loan and only 2% had used a bank loan to finance their businesses. Many believed that they could not offer sufficient collateral, business history, or income to secure a loan. Of the 80% who said that their businesses were not operating to their potential, 77% cited "lack of capital" as the primary constraint. Approximately 70% of ACCION Texas’ borrowers are Mexican-American and have businesses located in San Antonio’s low-income neighborhoods. ACCION Texas offers microloans from $500 to $25,000—with an average loan size of $3,100—and technical assistance to borrowers.**The CDFI Fund Award**A $500,000 grant from the CDFI Fund is assisting this CDFI in its efforts to expand service to more than 1,500 borrowers through loans totaling over $3.8 million over a five year period. The grant will also enable ACCION Texas to strengthen its organizational performance.

Since 1994, ACCION Texas has made 817 loans to 331 business owners totaling more than $2.5 million. A study of ACCION Texas’ borrowers found that the 25 clients who had received at least four loans from the program had experienced a 49-percent average increase in the dollar value of the their business assets from $7,971 to $11,870. Their monthly business profits increased an average of 55-percent and their take-home incomes increased 16%.

* *

**SANTA CRUZ COMMUNITY
CREDIT UNION Santa Cruz, California The Borrowers **

With a $1 million grant from the CDFI Fund, the Santa Cruz Community Credit Union has opened a new branch office serving the low-income population of Watsonville, California. Eleven percent of the total population and twenty-one percent of the children live below the poverty line in Watsonville. The opening of this new branch has extended needed financial services into the Watsonville community, a major agricultural area whose population is approximately 60% Hispanic. Prior to the opening of the new branch, Watsonville residents had limited access to the full-range of financial services now offered by Santa Cruz Community Credit Union.

Of note are two loans that have been made in Watsonville to address the critical needs of the community’s at-risk youth. Santa Cruz Community Credit Union provided a $160,000 loan to the Santa Cruz Community Counseling Center (the Community Center) enabling it to secure a counseling facility located right in downtown Watsonville. Prior to the Watsonville location, the Counseling Center’s nearest facility was approximately 15 miles away. The Counseling Center’s new Watsonville facility has provided greater accessibility to needed counseling services for the youth and families of Watsonville and now has a greater presence in the community.

In addition, Santa Cruz Community Credit Union has made a loan of almost $800,000 to nationally acclaimed Hispanic nonprofit organization that serves Santa Cruz County youth, focusing particularly on the Hispanic population and stopping gang-related violence. Santa Cruz Community Credit Union’s loan allowed this community based organization to consolidate their three geographically scattered facilities into one with room for future expansion. The nonprofit is a highly successful organization that uses, among other techniques, peer groups and working on the streets to reach youth that are most at-risk.

**Santa Cruz Community Credit Union**Since its inception in 1977, Santa Cruz Community Credit Union has achieved a remarkable track record as a full-service community development financial institution. It has attracted over 6,300 members and has increased its assets to $28 million.

Santa Cruz Community Credit Union offers its members a wide variety of services (savings, checking, credit cards, ATMs, telephone banking) and a range of lending products (consumer loans, real estate loans and business loans). A special lending focus is agricultural loans to support farm operations that employ environmentally sensitive practices such as integrated pest management techniques or sustainable organic growing practices.

**The CDFI Fund Award**A $1 million grant from the CDFI Fund has provided the Santa Cruz Community Credit Union with the capital it needed to implement its plans for a significant expansion – the new branch office in Watsonville.

Santa Cruz Community Credit Union has become a pre-eminent credit union in providing small business loans. To date, it has lent over $37 million to small businesses, cooperatives, and nonprofit service providers – generally entities that could not otherwise access loans from traditional sources. It has provided approximately $4 million in small business and nonprofit loans annually, and over 220 such loans are currently on its books. Over 70% of these loans have been made to minorities and women.

* *

* *

**SELF-HELP Durham, North Carolina Impact on Housing**Self-Help’s ability to leverage the CDFI Fund investment is noteworthy. The $3 million was used, in part, to leverage the purchase of affordable single-family mortgage loans from a North Carolina commercial bank. During the last year, this type of transaction was duplicated seven times with three banks, BB&T, Centura Bank, and First Union. Additional capital for these transactions was borrowed from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta, including $33 million in 1997 alone. Another $11 million was borrowed from banks through incentives from the BEA Program. The purchases of these mortgage pools have so far totaled $103 million and include 1,820 underlying mortgages. The average income of the homebuyers in these mortgage pools is 60% of the area median family income. (More than 55% of these homeowners live in rural areas, and 29% are minority.) Further, the capital the banks gain from the sale of mortgages is being used to make additional home purchase loans to lower-income families. With Self-Help’s demonstrated success, the CDFI is now in a position to open doors to the national capital markets to accelerate the flow of dollars available for achieving home ownership for North Carolina’s low-wealth families.

The increase in Self-Help’s asset base has also allowed for a 30% increase, over 1996 levels, in its small businesses and community facilities lending. A few loans that added particular community building value include: a loan to an African American property owner in Pittsboro to build a facility that is leased to a church-sponsored daycare center; a $250,000 loan to build a facility for a new charter school in Kingston; and a loan to an entrepreneur to finance a manufacturing business that converts recycled wood waste (from area mills) into fiber board that in turn is used in the production of doors purchased by building suppliers.

**Self-Help**Self-Help, launched in 1980, aggregates resources and forges partnerships with the public and private sectors and advocates for community development issues. Self Help’s two financing entities, Self-Help Credit Union and Self-Help Ventures Fund, provide access to credit for North Carolina’s distressed communities and low-wealth families. Self-Help Ventures Fund provides loans to emerging small businesses, provides management assistance to its commercial borrowers, and helps expand housing opportunities and community facilities. Self-Help’s steady growth and increased demand has allowed the this CDFI to open five regional offices in the state. Self-Help’s partnerships engages it in increasingly sophisticated transactions and leveraging strategies. Self-Help’s work is having significant impact in transforming conventional loan underwriting standards and, in particular, in creating increased opportunities for home ownership among the state’s lower income families.**The CDFI Fund’s Investment in Self-Help:**

The CDFI Fund’s $3 million grant was channeled to Self-Help Ventures Fund and helped to boost its equity capital and assisted it in expanding its secondary market initiatives. Beginning with Wachovia Bank, Self-Help has pioneered a means to create a continual flow of capital to provide mortgages for low-income homebuyers. Self-Help has expanded its asset base from $94 million in September 1996 to $140 million at the close of 1997.

**Republic National Bank
of New York New York, New York Reinvesting in Communities **

Republic National Bank of New York (Republic), which was awarded $519,659 in the first round of the Bank Enterprise Award (BEA) Program, is an avid proponent of investing in distressed communities and the community development financial institutions (CDFIs) which serve them. Republic has used all of its award to leverage an additional $5 million in economic development and small business lending in low- and moderate-income communities. In this way, its BEA award will be leveraged nearly 10 times over in the form of new lending. The award dollars have been used to create the Special Economic Development Fund which provides below market rates and create a loan loss reserve for loans Republic will make to non-profit economic development organizations over the next few years. Two examples are:

- A $2 million loan was made to the Local Initiatives Support Corporation (LISC)(a certified CDFI and a 1996 CDFI Program awardee), a financial and technical services intermediary focused on real estate development and operations which serves low-income communities throughout the nation. This loan, with a below market rate of 3% over 5 years, could not have been done without the Bank Enterprise Award.

- Republic is also lending $120,000 to Leviticus 25:23 Alternative Fund, Inc. (a certified CDFI and a 1997 CDFI Program awardee), which makes loans for affordable housing, community facilities and small businesses in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut. The $120,000, which is being made at 0% for 1 to 2 years, will be used to expand educational space at qualified child care facilities throughout New York City.

**Republic National Bank**Republic National Bank of New York is a full service bank, which is based in and serves New York and South Florida.**The CDFI Fund Award**Republic was awarded $519,659 under the BEA Program for providing loans and operating grants totaling $5,196,592 to 21 community development organizations. The institutions assisted by Republic range in size, products and service areas: the Local Initiatives Support Corporation, mentioned above, has a national service area; the Enterprise Foundation (a certified CDFI and a 1997 CDFI Program awardee), based in Columbia, Maryland, which provides loans and technical assistance to nonprofit developers of affordable housing serving distressed areas of 16 cities across the nation; and Bethex Federal Credit Union (a certified CDFI and a 1996 CDFI Program awardee), a full-service credit union serving the low-income residents of the South Bronx, New York.

* *

**Bank of America Community Development Bank**Walnut Creek, California**Reinvesting in Communities**In addition to significantly increasing its lending activity in eligible distressed neighborhoods—activity that qualified it for an award of $1,585,510 under the first round of the Bank Enterprise Award (BEA) Program in 1996—the Bank of America (B of A) Community Development Bank, together with Bank of America, F.S.B., has invested its entire combined Bank Enterprise Award back into the community. $1.1 million of the award money has been used to establish the Bank of America Leadership Academy, a nine-month program that provides training for senior management of community development organizations. The B of A Leadership Academy is funded jointly by Bank of America Community Development Bank, Bank of America, F.S.B., and the Local Initiatives Support Corporation (a certified CDFI and a 1996 CDFI Program awardee); and is conducted by the Development Training Institute. The B of A Leadership Academy is funded for three nine-month programs. Each session trains 35 executive directors or senior staff of community-based development organizations that are at least five years old and have completed at least three projects.

An additional 20 percent of the combined awards will go to the Low Income Housing Fund, a certified CDFI and a 1996 CDFI Program awardee which provides loans for very low-income housing development across the country.

**The Bank of America Community Development Bank**The Bank of America Community Development Bank is based in Walnut Creek, California and has a service area that includes the entire State of California. The bank provides a range of lending products, including multi-family housing, commercial real estate, and business loans.**The CDFI Fund Award**The B of A Community Development Bank was awarded $1,585,510 in the 1996 funding round for increasing its multi-family housing, commercial real estate and business loans in distressed communities across California. The Bank made nearly $25 million in loans in targeted neighborhoods meeting the BEA Program’s distress criteria, including $9.5 million in commercial real estate loans, $13.2 million in multifamily loans, and $2.2 million in business loans. The Bank projects that these loans will generate more than 185 units of affordable housing and 300 jobs. The Bank’s increased multifamily lending activity has helped provide a vital source of affordable housing for low-income families in targeted neighborhoods in San Francisco, Modesto, and Los Angeles, including the projects described below:

- a $2.6 million construction loan to support the acquisition and rehabilitation of a deteriorated residential hotel in San Francisco’s Tenderloin neighborhood into 58 units of quality affordable housing for formerly homeless individuals; and

- a $6.8 million loan to support construction of a new 79-unit apartment building located in Downtown Los Angeles. The building serves households earning less than 60% of Los Angeles County’s median income.

 

*Financial Discussion*

*and Analysis *

**Financial Management Systems**The CDFI Fund's financial statements included in this annual report represent the first stand alone statements prepared by the Fund since its inception in FY 1995. Prior to this report, financial information for the CDFI Fund had been included as part of the Department of the Treasury's annual Accountability Report for FY 1996.

Since the beginning of the Fund, accounting services and financial statement preparation have been performed outside of the Fund in other Treasury offices. Until mid FY 1997, these services were performed by the Financial Management Division in the Departmental Offices. For the last half of FY 1997, accounting services and financial statement preparation were contracted to the Bureau of the Public Debt-Franchise Services.

Since the beginning of the Fund, accounting services and financial statement preparation have been performed outside of the Fund in other Treasury offices. Until mid FY 1997, these services were performed by the Financial Management Division in the Departmental Offices. For the last half of FY 1997, accounting services and financial statement preparation were contracted to the Bureau of the Public Debt-Franchise Services.

With these first audited financial statements and stand-alone annual report, the CDFI Fund, a wholly owned government corporation, is not only complying with its enabling legislation, but also conforming to the spirit of the CFO Act of 1990 and the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) of 1993. In addition, in the first quarter of FY 1998, a Deputy Director for Management/Chief Financial Officer was appointed for the CDFI Fund and a process begun to establish an internal Fund financial management structure and staff.

**Federal Managers’ Financial
Integrity Act (FMFIA) Highlights **

During FY 1997, the CDFI Fund did not have a formal FMFIA program in place to evaluate, continuously monitor and improve the effectiveness of management controls associated with the Fund’s programs. Consequently, the Fund’s internal control process during this period lacked adequate individual program and operating level self-assessment to provide reasonable assurance that its systems of management, accounting, and administrative control, taken as a whole, achieved FMFIA and FFMIA objectives.

A formal FMFIA program enables management to make an assertion that:

- obligations and costs comply with applicable laws;
- assets are safeguarded against waste, fraud, abuse, and mismanagement;
- revenues and expenditures applicable to the CDFI Fund operations are properly recorded and accounted for so that accounting, financial, and statistical reports may be prepared, and accountability of the assets may be maintained; and
- programs are efficiently and effectively carried out in accordance with applicable laws and management policies.

As a first step towards the preparation of a CDFI Fund Annual Report and audited financial statements for FY 1997, the Fund management initiated an FMFIA review subsequent to September 30, 1997. As a result of this review, which did not include any transaction testing, the following material weaknesses were identified. Currently corrective action plans are being developed with target dates for completion in the first half of FY 1998.

1. Title and Description: (CDFI 97-01) No formal FMFIA Program in place.CDFI did not have a formal FMFIA program in place during FY 1997 to evaluate, continuously monitor and improve the effectiveness of management controls associated with CDFI’s programs. Therefore, all of the Fund's internal control processes lacked adequate individual program and operating level self-assessment.Status and Accomplishments: Subsequent to September 30, 1997, the CDFI Fund management initiated an FMFIA review to assess its internal controls. This review identified seven material weaknesses and three instances of administrative systems’ non-conformance. During the first half of FY 1998, the Fund will establish a formal management control process and designate the Deputy Director for Management/CFO as the Fund’s Management Control Officer.: Subsequent to September 30, 1997, the CDFI Fund management initiated an FMFIA review to assess its internal controls. This review identified seven material weaknesses and three instances of administrative systems’ non-conformance. During the first half of FY 1998, the Fund will establish a formal management control process and designate the Deputy Director for Management/CFO as the Fund’s Management Control Officer.
2. Title and Description: (CDFI 97-02) CFO and Controller positions and functions not established.The CDFI Fund did not hire a Chief Financial Officer (CFO) until after September 30, 1997. Since a CFO’s duties would normally include overseeing all aspects of the Fund’s administrative, accounting, reporting, management controls, budgetary, portfolio monitoring, and compliance with laws and regulations, these areas were not receiving sufficient management attention during FY 1997. In addition, the Fund lacked a controller (financial manager) to oversee the day-to-day accounting functions, as well as the accounting activities performed for the Fund by the Bureau of the Public Debt. The lack of a CFO and Controller potentially impairs the Fund’s management ability to make sound financial decisions and to monitor the Fund’s financial and performance activities.Status and Accomplishments: A Deputy Director for Management/Chief Financial Officer was appointed in November, 1997. A staff accountant was hired in January, 1998. Additional financial positions are being developed and hiring will continue through the first half of FY 1998.: A Deputy Director for Management/Chief Financial Officer was appointed in November, 1997. A staff accountant was hired in January, 1998. Additional financial positions are being developed and hiring will continue through the first half of FY 1998.
3. Title and Description: (CDFI 97-03) Awards Administration and Monitoring Positions and functions not established.The duties of an awards officer normally include serving as the principal procedural authority, advisor and implementer of awards management policies. Key to such a function is the development and coordination of the Fund's awards management program, including the dissemination of procedural and technical advice, guidance and interpretation on CDFI award management activities and requirements, maintenance of award files, as well as sufficient monitoring of the pre- and post-award operations of the Fund. The lack of an awards manager impairs the Fund’s ability to carry out the above activities and to monitor CDFI’s program performance and compliance activities.Status and Accomplishments: Policies and procedures for an awards administration and monitoring function are being developed in the first half of FY 1998. An Awards Officer reported for duty in January, 1998.: Policies and procedures for an awards administration and monitoring function are being developed in the first half of FY 1998. An Awards Officer reported for duty in January, 1998.
4. Title and Description: (CDFI 97-04) Post Award Monitoring Procedures not established and implemented.
5. : (CDFI 97-01) No formal FMFIA Program in place. : Subsequent to September 30, 1997, the CDFI Fund management initiated an FMFIA review to assess its internal controls. This review identified seven material weaknesses and three instances of administrative systems’ non-conformance. During the first half of FY 1998, the Fund will establish a formal management control process and designate the Deputy Director for Management/CFO as the Fund’s Management Control Officer.: (CDFI 97-02) CFO and Controller positions and functions not established. : A Deputy Director for Management/Chief Financial Officer was appointed in November, 1997. A staff accountant was hired in January, 1998. Additional financial positions are being developed and hiring will continue through the first half of FY 1998.: (CDFI 97-03) Awards Administration and Monitoring Positions and functions not established. : Policies and procedures for an awards administration and monitoring function are being developed in the first half of FY 1998. An Awards Officer reported for duty in January, 1998.: (CDFI 97-04) Post Award Monitoring Procedures not established and implemented.

The CDFI Fund lacked formalized, documented post-award monitoring procedures and responsibilities during FY 1997. Monitoring procedures provide a means to assess the award recipient’s compliance with their assistance agreements and to determine whether corrective actions are necessary or accomplished in an efficient and timely manner, and a methodology to aid the CDFI Fund in meeting its goals and objectives. Performance award monitoring procedures normally include, among other things, ensuring periodic financial and performance reports required to be submitted by the awardee are received by the Fund, reviewed, and acted upon accordingly. Monitoring procedures can also include site visits, and ensuring performance objectives are being achieved and the awardee’s reporting requirements are being met.

Status and Accomplishments: During the first half of FY 1998, the Fund will:

: During the first half of FY 1998, the Fund will:

- Develop written, formal, ongoing monitoring procedures and forms and place them into operation.
- Continue with the design and development of a portfolio monitoring database system.
- Determine the audit guidelines for the CDFI awardees to follow.

- Track the receipt of all required reporting activities for all CDFI awardees since the inception of the Fund.

1. Title and Description: (CDFI 97-05) No formal review of monthly financial statements and accounting records or completion of supporting reconciliations.Monthly trial balances and other reports such as spending transaction reports, budget and obligation reports were not routinely reviewed and reconciled to source documentation such as invoices and purchase orders. Where reviews were performed, documentation of the review procedures was not evident. There was no formalized administrative funds control policy or process. Lack of a formalized review of monthly financial statements and other financial reports impairs the Fund’s management ability to effectively and adequately monitor the CDFI Fund’s financial activities.Status and Accomplishments: During the first half of FY 1998, the Fund will establish a formal process for preparing and distributing monthly financial statements. The Deputy Director for Management/CFO will establish and implement Fund policies and procedures for the administrative control of funds. Monthly financial statements will be reviewed and any issues acted upon in a timely manner.: During the first half of FY 1998, the Fund will establish a formal process for preparing and distributing monthly financial statements. The Deputy Director for Management/CFO will establish and implement Fund policies and procedures for the administrative control of funds. Monthly financial statements will be reviewed and any issues acted upon in a timely manner.
2. Title and Description: (CDFI 97-06) Inadequate Delineation of Organizational Responsibilities.
3. : (CDFI 97-05) No formal review of monthly financial statements and accounting records or completion of supporting reconciliations. : During the first half of FY 1998, the Fund will establish a formal process for preparing and distributing monthly financial statements. The Deputy Director for Management/CFO will establish and implement Fund policies and procedures for the administrative control of funds. Monthly financial statements will be reviewed and any issues acted upon in a timely manner.: (CDFI 97-06) Inadequate Delineation of Organizational Responsibilities.

During FY 1997 there was insufficient delineation of organization responsibilities within the Fund. In general, position descriptions were not adequately adhered to and/or do not adequately define the responsibilities of specific positions. The Fund has been understaffed since its inception in a number of key positions. In addition, there are no established procedures for periodically evaluating employee's performance against established performance criteria and goals. This combination of conditions resulted in instances of incompatible duties, lack of accountability, and ambiguous job responsibilities.

Status and Accomplishments: During the first half of FY 1998, the Fund will establish and formalize a new organizational structure centered around a Director and two Deputy Directors, a Deputy Director for Management/Chief Financial Officer and a Deputy Director for Policy and Programs. In addition the fund will:

: During the first half of FY 1998, the Fund will establish and formalize a new organizational structure centered around a Director and two Deputy Directors, a Deputy Director for Management/Chief Financial Officer and a Deputy Director for Policy and Programs. In addition the fund will:

- Reevaluate all existing position descriptions;
- Establish performance criteria and standards for each Fund position
- Implement a performance appraisal process; and
- Establish an awards system for employee performance.

1. Title and Description: (CDFI 97-07) Program Award Files not completed.
2. : (CDFI 97-07) Program Award Files not completed.

During FY 1997, the CDFI Fund award files lacked a structured file order format and were not reviewed for completeness. A consistent and structured format is critical in order to have strong controls over the award process and overall monitoring of awards.

Status and Accomplishments: During the first half of FY 1998, the Fund will finalize an awards Table of Contents and identify all documents that should be included in the awards files for FY 1996 and FY 1997. These files will include all relevant documentation received from applicants, whether or not funds were awarded to the applicant. Files will be set up in accordance with the Table of Contents and each file reviewed for completeness. Thereafter, all files will be maintained in accordance with this master Table of Contents, with files updated timely and maintained in accordance with the Fund’s awards administration policies.

: During the first half of FY 1998, the Fund will finalize an awards Table of Contents and identify all documents that should be included in the awards files for FY 1996 and FY 1997. These files will include all relevant documentation received from applicants, whether or not funds were awarded to the applicant. Files will be set up in accordance with the Table of Contents and each file reviewed for completeness. Thereafter, all files will be maintained in accordance with this master Table of Contents, with files updated timely and maintained in accordance with the Fund’s awards administration policies.

**Management Responsibilities**The CDFI Fund management is responsible for the fair presentation of information contained in the principal financial statements, in conformity with the accounting hierarchy described in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, which constitutes an "other comprehensive basis of accounting." Management is also responsible for the fair presentation of the Fund’s performance measures in accordance with Office of Management and Budget requirements. The quality of the Fund’s internal control structure rests with management, as well as the responsibility for identification and compliance with pertinent laws and regulations.**Limitations of the Financial Statements**The financial statements, included as part of this total package, present the financial position and results of operations of the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund for the years ended September 30, 1997, 1996 and 1995 pursuant to the requirements of the Government Management Reform Act of 1994. While the financial statements have been prepared from records in accordance with the formats prescribed by the Office of Management and Budget Bulletin No. 94-01, "Form and Content of Agency Financial Statements," the statements are different from the financial reports used to monitor and control budgetary resources that are prepared from the same records and are subsequently presented in Federal budget documents. Therefore, readers are advised that direct comparisons are not possible between figures found in this report and similar financial concepts found in the fiscal year 1997, 1996 and 1995 Budget of the United States Government. Additionally, the financial statements should be reviewed with the realization that they are for a sovereign entity (the United States Government), that liabilities not covered by budgetary resources reported in the financial statements cannot be liquidated without the enactment of an appropriation, and that the payment of all liabilities other than for contracts can be abrogated by the sovereign entity.

*Reports from*

*the Auditors*

**Independent Auditors' Report on Financial Statements**The Inspector General, U.S. Department of the Treasury, and Director, Community Development Financial Institutions Fund:

We have audited the accompanying statements of financial position of the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Community Development Financial Institutions Fund (the CDFI Fund) as of September 30, 1997, 1996, and 1995, and the related statements of operations and changes in net position and cash flows for the years ended September 30, 1997 and 1996, and the period from July 27, 1995 (inception) to September 30, 1995. These financial statements are the responsibility of the CDFI Fund's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.

We conducted our audits in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards; the standards applicable to financial audits contained in*Government Auditing Standards, *issuedby the Comptroller General of the United States; and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Bulletin No. 93-06,*Audit Requirements for Federal Financial Statements, *as amended. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.

As discussed in Note 1, these financial statements were prepared in conformity with the hierarchy of accounting principles and standards recommended by the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board. This hierarchy is a comprehensive basis of accounting other than generally accepted accounting principles.

In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Community Development Financial Institutions Fund as of September 30, 1997, 1996, and 1995, and the results of its operations, its changes in net position and its cash flows for the years ended September 30, 1997 and 1996, and the period from July 27, 1995 (inception) to September 30, 1995, in conformity with the basis of accounting described in Note 1.

I-1

As described in Note 1 to the financial statements, the CDFI Fund implemented Statementof Federal Financial Accounting Standards No. 5,*Accounting for Liabilities of the Federal **Government, *effective October 1, 1996.

 

Our audit was made for the purpose of forming an opinion on the financial statements of the CDFI Fund, taken as a whole. The information in the sections of the CDFI Fund Annual Report listed below is not a required part of the financial statements but is supplementary information required by OMB Bulletins No. 94-01 and No. 97-01,*Form and Content of
Agency Financial Statements:*

 

- Executive Summary and Highlights
- Organizational Profile
- Program Discussion and Analysis
- Financial Discussion and Analysis
- Appendices
- Management Officials and Advisory Board Members

 

We have considered whether this information is materially inconsistent with the principal financial statements. Such information has not been subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the audits of the financial statements, and accordingly, we express no opinion on it. The performance information included in the Program Discussion and Analysis and Financial Discussion and Analysis sections of the CDFI Fund Annual Report is addressed in our Independent Auditors' Report on Internal Controls over Financial Reporting in accordance with OMB Bulletin No. 93-06, as amended.

 

In accordance with*Government Auditing Standards, *we have also issued reports dated February 23, 1998, on our consideration of the CDFI Fund's internal controls over financial reporting and on its compliance with laws and regulations.

 

This report is intended for the information of the CDFI Fund's management and the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Inspector General. However, this report is a matter of public record and its distribution is not limited.

February 23, 1998Washington, DC

I-2

**Independent Auditors' Report on Internal Controls over Financial Reporting**The Inspector General, U.S. Department of the Treasury, and

Director, Community Development Financial Institutions Fund:

 

We have audited the financial statements of the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Community Development Financial Institutions Fund (the CDFI Fund) as of and for the year ended September 30, 1997, and have issued our report thereon dated February 23, 1998. Our report refers to the CDFI Fund's change in an accounting principle. We conducted our audit in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards; the standards applicable to financial audits contained in*Government Auditing Standards, *issued by the Comptroller General of the United States; and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Bulletin No. 93-06,*Audit Requirements for Federal **Financial Statements, *as amended.

 

The CDFI Fund's management is responsible for establishing and maintaining internal controls.In fulfilling this responsibility, estimates and judgments by management are required to assessthe expected benefits and related costs of internal control policies and procedures. The objectives of internal controls are to provide management with reasonable, but not absolute, assurance that:

 

- Transactions, including those related to obligations and costs, are executed in compliancewith applicable laws and regulations that could have a direct and material effect on the financial statements, and any other laws and regulations, that OMB, the CDFI Fund management, or the Department of the Treasury's Inspector General have identified as being significant for which compliance can be objectively measured and evaluated;

 

- Funds, property, and other assets are safeguarded against loss from unauthorized use or disposition;

 

- Transactions are executed in accordance with management's authorization and are properly recorded and accounted for to permit the preparation of reliable financial reports in accordance with applicable accounting principles described in Note 1 to the financial statements, and to maintain accountability over the assets; and

 

- Data that support reported performance measures are properly recorded and accounted for to permit preparation of reliable and complete performance information.

II-1

 

Because of inherent limitations in internal controls, fraud may nevertheless occur and not be detected. Also, projection of any evaluation of internal controls to future periods is subject to the risk that procedures may become inadequate because of changes in conditions or that the effectiveness of the design and operation of policies and procedures may deteriorate.

 

In planning and performing our audit, we considered the CDFI Fund's internal controls over financial reporting in order to determine our auditing procedures for the purpose of expressing our opinion on the financial statements, and not to provide an opinion on internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. With respect to internal controls, we obtained an understanding of the design of relevant policies and procedures, determined if they have been placed in operation, assessed control risk, and performed tests of internal controls.

 

Our evaluation of the controls for performance information was limited to those controls designed to ensure the existence and completeness of the information. With respect to the performance measure control objective, we obtained an understanding of relevant internal control policies and procedures designed to permit preparation of reliable and complete performance information (e.g., program and statistical information), and we assessed control risk.

 

We noted certain matters involving the internal control over financial reporting and its operation that we consider to be reportable conditions under standards established by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and OMB Bulletin No. 93-06, as amended. Reportable conditions involve matters coming to our attention relating to significant deficiencies in the design or operation of the internal control over financial reporting that, in our judgment, could adversely affect the CDFI Fund's ability to ensure that the objectives of the internal controls, as defined above, are being achieved. The reportable conditions we identified are described in accompanying Exhibit.

 

A material weakness is a condition in which the design or operation of one or more of the internal control components does not reduce to a relatively low level the risk that misstatements, in amounts that would be material in relation to the financial statements being audited, or material to a performance measure or aggregation of related performance measures, may occur and not be detected within a timely period by employees in the normal course of performing their assigned functions. Our consideration of internal controls would not necessarily disclose all matters in the internal controls that might be reportable conditions, and accordingly, would not necessarily disclose all reportable conditions that are also considered to be material weaknesses, as defined above. However, we consider the matters identified in Comment A of the reportable conditions included in the Exhibit to be material weaknesses.

 

These conditions were considered in determining the nature, timing, and extent of audit procedures to be performed in our audit of the CDFI Fund's 1997 financial statements.

II-2

 

We also noted other matters involving internal controls and their operation that we have reported to the management of the CDFI Fund in a separate letter dated February 23, 1998.

 

This report is intended for the information of the CDFI Fund's management and the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Inspector General. However, this report is a matter of public record and its distribution is not limited.

February 23, 1998

Washington, DC

II-3

 

Exhibit I

 

**COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS FUND Reportable Conditions in Internal Control over Financial Reporting A. Lack of a Formal FMFIA Process and Internal Controls over Procedures**During the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund’s (the CDFI Fund) initial operating period (July 27, 1995 to September 30, 1997), critical management personnel werenot in place and accordingly, internal control over financial reporting was not establishedmaintained. Although there was limited financial activity at the CDFI Fund during much of thistime, and certain financial managers within the U.S. Department of the Treasury (the Treasury)were assigned responsibility for maintaining the financial records related to the CDFI Fundactivity, specific responsibility for establishing a system of internal controls and maintainingaccountability for CDFI Fund assets was not addressed. As financial activity increasedtowards the end of fiscal year 1997, the need for separately identified and financiallyaccountable management for the CDFI Fund became more apparent and corrective actionsbegan to be taken.

 

However, during the period under audit, the following weaknesses in internal controls existed which could have adversely affected the CDFI Fund's ability to ensure that the objectives of internal controls, as previously identified, were achieved:

 

- Absence of a formal Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA) program to identify and design corrective actions for material weaknesses

- Lack of a structured system of documentation for award files
- Vacant positions for oversight of awards programs
- Lack of formal post-awards monitoring procedures
- No formal review of monthly financial statements, accounting records, budgetary reports, and supporting reconciliations
- Vacant positions for Chief Financial Officer and Controller
- Inadequate delineation of organization responsibilities within the CDFI Fund
- General lack of documented policies and procedures

 

As a result of the foregoing, we concluded it was not cost-beneficial to place reliance on anyinternal controls maintained by the Treasury over financial reporting for the CDFI Fund for fiscal years 1995 and 1996. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 1997, we evaluated and testedrelevant internal controls over financial reporting maintained at the Treasury on behalf of the CDFI and, for all three years, performed other substantive audit procedures to the extent weconsidered necessary to satisfy ourselves that amounts reported in the financial statementswere materially correct.

II-4

 

Exhibit I, Continued

 

However, we believe immediate and continual attention must be placed on corrective actionnecessary to eliminate the material weaknesses noted above. Failure to do so, along with theexpected increase in financial activity of the CDFI Fund over the next several years, couldresult in material misstatements in the financial statements and/or material noncompliance withlaws and regulations that could have a direct and material effect on the financial statements.

 

We noted the CDFI Fund has taken important first steps in fiscal year 1998 to address these material weaknesses. Since the beginning of fiscal year 1998, the following critical management positions at the CDFI Fund have been filled:

- Deputy Director for Management/CFO November 1997Awards Officer January 1998Staff Accountant January 1998

As new personnel join the CDFI Fund, needed policies and procedures are among those itemsthat will be addressed. Additionally, the Deputy Director for Management/CFO brought in contractors to perform an FMFIA assessment for 1997 during the first quarter of fiscal year1998. The plan is for this assessment to be performed internally in the future and become a partof the CDFI Fund annual financial reporting process.

 

Plans to establish formal policies and procedures for administrative control of funds and reviews of monthly financial statements are currently being addressed by the Deputy Director for Management/CFO. Also, with the appointment of an Awards Officer, policies and procedures for post-award monitoring of awardees and awardee file maintenance are being addressed. Finally, we were informed by the Deputy Director for Management/CFO that the Fund plans to evaluate its structure and operations, to determine whether there are more efficient ways of accomplishing their goals and carrying out their mission.

 

Recommendation

We believe that the CDFI Fund has developed some strong plans for accomplishment in fiscal year 1998. We recommend that the CDFI continue to implement its plans and monitor whether their implementation is achieving their goals.

 

Specifically, action must be taken to:

 

- Establish a formal management control process and designate the Deputy Directorfor Management/CFO as the Fund's Management Control Officer

- Develop additional financial management positions and recruit personnel to fill these positions as soon as practicable
- Develop policies and procedures for an awards administration and monitoringfunction, in the first half of fiscal year 1998
- Develop formal, ongoing monitoring procedures, and related forms, and place theminto operation

 

II-5

 

Exhibit I, Continued

 

- Continue the design and development of a portfolio monitoring database

- Determine and communicate audit guidelines for the CDFI Fund awardees to follow
- Track the receipt of all required reporting activities for all the CDFI Fund awardees since the inception of the fund
- Establish a formal process for preparing, reviewing and distributing monthlyfinancial statements, including specific procedures for follow-up on any issues identified during the process
- Finalize the awards file maintenance program and develop a "file contents checklist"to identify all documents that should be included in the awards files

 

**B. Recognition of Grant Award Expenses**The CDFI currently administers two grant award programs -- the CDFI Fund program, and the BEA program.

 

The CDFI program awards grants to awardees based on projected performance and with the condition that the awardee certify that eligible matching funds are available. Once a program assistance agreement is signed as evidence that the projected performance is approved and matching funds are certified as available, the CDFI Fund has incurred a liability to disbursethe grant funds to the awardee. Awards are not made on a reimbursement basis, and the awards are revocable only for failure to meet performance goals or other material noncompliance with program provisions.

 

The BEA program awards institutions for past performance and in anticipation of future performance goals set by the institution. The awards can be made over a period of time or all at once. Before payment is made, the BEA recipient must demonstrate that it has met the performance goals it set. Once the awardee has demonstrated that it has met its performance goals, a payable should be recognized by CDFI because no further action on the part of the awardee is required to "earn" the award.

 

Our audit revealed that liabilities incurred as a result of the awards process as described above had not been recorded by the CDFI Fund as earned by the awardees, but rather as the awards were disbursed. As a result, awards payable were understated by $19 million and $9.4 millionat September 30, 1997 and 1996, respectively. Audit adjustments to record the awards payable and related grants expense were made by CDFI to correct these accounting errors.

 

Recommendation

We recommend that the CDFI Fund record payables for grant awards and related grants expense at the point in time when the awards are earned by the awardees, rather than when disbursed in cash.

 

II-6

**Independent Auditors' Report on Compliance with Laws and Regulations**The Inspector General, U.S. Department of the Treasury, and

Director, Community Development Financial Institutions Fund:

We have audited the financial statements of the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Community Development Financial Institutions Fund (CDFI) as of and for the year ended September 30, 1997, and have issued our report thereon dated February 23, 1998. Our report refers to the CDFI Fund's change in an accounting principle. We conducted our audit in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards; the standards applicable to financial audits contained in*Government Auditing Standards, *issued by the Comptroller General of the United States; and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Bulletin No. 93-06,*Audit Requirements for Federal **Financial Statements, *as amended.

 

The management of the CDFI Fund is responsible for complying with laws and regulations applicable to the CDFI Fund. As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the CDFI Fund's financial statements are free of material misstatement, we performed tests of the CDFI Fund's compliance with certain provisions of laws and regulations, noncompliance with which could have a direct and material effect on the determination of financial statement amounts, and certain other laws and regulations specified in Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Bulletin No. 93-06, as amended, including the requirements referred to in the Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act (FMFIA) of 1982 and the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act (FFMIA) of 1996. However, providing an opinion on compliance with certain provisions of laws and regulations was not an objective of our audit. Accordingly, we do not express such an opinion.

 

Material instances of noncompliance are failures to follow requirements, or violations of prohibitions, contained in laws or regulations that cause us to conclude that the aggregation of the misstatements resulting from those failures or violations is material to the financial statements, or the sensitivity of the matter would cause it to be perceived as significant by others. The results of the CDFI Fund's internal assessment and our tests of compliance disclosed the following instance of noncompliance that is required to be reported under*Government Auditing Standards *and OMB Bulletin 93-06, as amended.

III-1

*Absence of a Formal FMFIA Process*

 

From the inception of the CDFI Fund in fiscal year 1995 to the end of fiscal year 1997, the CDFI Fund did not have a process in place to assess and report on internal controls as required under FMFIA, including an assessment of its compliance with automated systems guidance as required by FFMIA. The results of an FMFIA assessment conducted subsequent to September 30, 1997 (during the first quarter of fiscal year 1998), disclosed a lack of controls over internal financial reporting and a lack of policies and procedures in place to manage award programs during the initial three-year operating period. It also disclosed critical management positions were vacant, including those of the Chief Financial Officer and an Awards Officer. Our audit tests confirmed these weaknesses. The overall weaknesses in CDFI Fund's internal controls is discussed in our Independent Auditors' Report on Internal Controls over Financial Reporting, dated February 23, 1998.

 

Recommendation

 

We recommend the filling of remaining essential management positions and establishment of procedures to assess internal controls through an FMFIA process continue to receive the highest priority of the CDFI Fund Director and Chief Financial Officer. (Action to begin in February 1998.)

 

*Federal Financial Management Improvement Act Requirements*

 

With respect to FFMIA, OMB Bulletin 93-06, as amended, requires us to report whether the CDFI Fund's financial management systems substantially comply with (1) the Federal financial management systems requirements, (2) applicable accounting standards, and (3) the United States Standard General Ledger at the transaction level. Accordingly, we performed tests of compliance using the implementation guidance for FFMIA issued by OMB on September 9, 1997.

 

As discussed above, the CDFI Fund did not conduct a formal FMFIA assessment in fiscal year 1997. This impacted the CDFI Fund's ability to assess financial systems compliance with Federal standards. This matter was reported as a material weakness in the CDFI Fund's internal controls. In addition, the CDFI Fund has a material weakness relating to recording awards expenses and payables transactions, which is an indication of noncompliance with applicable accounting standards. This weakness is discussed in the Independent Auditors' Report on Internal Controls over Financial Reporting, dated February 23, 1998.

 

An audit of financial statements conducted in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards; the standards applicable to financial audits contained in*Government Auditing **Standards, *issued by the Comptroller General of the United States; and OMB Bulletin No. 93-06 is not designed to detect whether the CDFI Fund's systems are Year 2000 compliant. Further, we have no responsibility with regard to the CDFI Fund's efforts to make its systems,

III-2

 

or any other systems, such as those of the CDFI Fund's vendors, service providers, or any other third parties, Year 2000 compliant or provide assurance on whether the CDFI Fund has addressed or will be able to address all of the affected systems on a timely basis. These are responsibilities of the CDFI Fund's management.

 

Recommendation

 

Our recommendation relating to the FMFIA process and improving controls are discussed in our separately issued Independent Auditors' Report on Internal Controls over Financial Reporting, dated February 23, 1998. (Action to begin in March 1998.)

 

* * * * *

 

This report is intended for the information of the CDFI Fund's management and the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Inspector General. However, this report is a matter of public record and its distribution is not limited.

February 23, 1998Washington, DC

III-3

*Financial Statements*

**Community Development Financial Institutions Fund Statements of Financial Position As of September 30, 1997, 1996 and 1995 1997 1996 1995**

Assets

Intragovernmental Assets

Fund Balances with Treasury (Note 2)

$

104,926,682

$

93,276,885

$

49,939,272

Advances and Prepayments

 

38,124

 

21,986

 

1,961

Governmental Assets

Investments

 

5,996,900

Credit Program Receivables (Note 3)

 

2,260,892

Interest Receivable

 

14,860

Total Assets

$

113,237,458

$

93,298,871

$

49,941,233

Liabilities

Liabilities Covered by Budgetary Resources

Intragovernmental Liabilities

Accounts Payable

$

111,588

$

70,324

$

 

Interest Payable

 

251,970

Debt (Note 4)

 

3,712,601

Governmental Liabilities

Accounts Payable

 

480,659

 

145,663

 

4,742

Awards Payable

 

19,029,187

 

9,425,453

Accrued Payroll

 

9,202

 

28,894

 

19,160

Total Liabilities Covered by Budgetary Resources

 

23,595,207

 

9,670,334

 

23,902

Liabilities Not Covered by Budgetary Resources

Governmental Liabilities

Accrued Annual Leave

 

61,727

 

34,288

 

4,489

Total Liabilities Not Covered by Budgetary Resources

 

61,727

 

34,288

 

4,489

Total Liabilities

 

23,656,934

 

9,704,622

 

28,391

Commitments and Contingencies (Notes 3, 6 and 8)

Net Position (Note 5)

Balances

Unexpended Appropriations

 

83,645,351

 

83,628,537

 

49,917,331

Invested Capital

 

5,996,900

Future Funding Requirements

 

(61,727)

 

(34,288)

 

(4,489)

Total Net Position

 

89,580,524

 

83,594,249

 

49,912,842

Total Liabilities and Net Position

$

113,237,458

$

93,298,871

$

49,941,233

*The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.*

 

**Community Development Financial Institutions Fund Statements of Operations and Changes in Net Position Years Ended September 30, 1997 and 1996 and the Period from July 27, 1995 (inception) to September 30, 1995 1997 1996 1995**

Revenues and Financing Sources

Appropriated Capital Used

$

43,947,778

$

11,288,794

$

437,854

Interest and Penalties, Non-Federal

 

35,087

Interest, Federal

 

176,181

Interest, Subsidy

 

40,702

Other Financing Sources (Note 7)

 

27,548

Total Revenues and Financing Sources

 

44,227,296

 

11,288,794

 

437,854

Expenses

CDFI Grants and Subsidies

 

20,007,372

BEA Grants

 

19,348,245

 

9,425,453

Administration

 

4,646,573

 

1,892,924

 

442,343

Total Operating Expenses (Note 8)

 

44,002,190

 

11,318,377

 

442,343

Interest

Federal Financing Bank/Treasury Borrowing

 

251,970

Other

 

575

 

216

Total Expenses

 

44,254,735

 

11,318,593

 

442,343

Shortage of Revenues and Financing Sources

Over Total Expenses

$

(27,439)

$

(29,799)

$

(4,489)

Net Position, Beginning Balance as Previously Stated

$

83,594,249

$

49,912,842

$

 

Prior Period Adjustments

 

(38,508)

Net Position, Beginning Balance as Adjusted

 

83,555,741

 

49,912,842

Shortage of Revenues and Financing Sources

Over Total Expenses

 

(27,439)

 

(29,799)

 

(4,489)

Non-Operating Changes (Note 9)

 

6,052,222

 

33,711,206

 

49,917,331

Net Position, Ending Balance

$

89,580,524

$

83,594,249

$

49,912,842

*The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.*

**Community Development Financial Institutions Fund Statement of Cash Flows Years Ended September 30, 1997 and 1996 and the Period from July 27, 1995 (inception) to September 30, 1995 1997 1996 1995**

Cash Flows From Operating Activities

Shortage of Revenue and Financing Sources Over Total Expenses

 

$

 

(27,439)

$

 

(29,799)

$

 

(4,489)

Adjustments affecting Cash Flow:

Appropriated Capital Used

 

(43,947,778)

 

(11,288,794)

 

(437,854)

Increase in Advances and Prepayments

 

(16,138)

 

(20,026)

 

(1,961)

Increase in Interest Receivable

 

(14,860)

Increase in Accounts Payable

 

608,538

 

220,980

 

23,902

Increase in Awards Payable

 

9,603,734

 

9,425,453

Direct Loan Subsidy

 

1,339,108

Increase in Unfunded Leave

 

27,439

 

29,799

 

4,489

Prior Period Adjustments

 

(38,508)

Net Cash Used by Operations

 

(32,465,904)

 

(1,662,387)

 

(415,913)

Cash Flows from Investing Activities

Purchase of Investments

 

(5,996,900)

Direct Loans Disbursed

 

(3,600,000)

Net Cash Used by Investing Activities

 

(9,596,900)

Cash Flows from Financing Activities

Net Appropriation Received

 

50,000,000

 

45,000,000

 

50,355,185

Borrowing from Treasury

 

3,712,601

Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities

 

53,712,601

 

45,000,000

 

50,355,185

Net Change in Fund Balances with Treasury

 

11,649,797

 

43,337,613

 

49,939,272

Fund Balances with Treasury, Beginning

 

93,276,885

 

49,939,272

Fund Balances with Treasury, Ending

$

104,926,682

$

93,276,885

$

49,939,272

*The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.*

**Notes to the Financial Statements Years Ended September 30, 1997and 1996
and the Period from July 27, 1995 (inception) to September 30, 1995 Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies Basis of Presentation **

These financial statements have been prepared to report the financial position, results of operations and cash flows of the Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) Fund. The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s (the Treasury) Bureau of the Public Debt-Franchise Services provides administrative accounting services to the CDFI Fund. These financial statements summarize the administrative accounting records maintained by the Bureau of the Public Debt-Franchise Services in its Federal Financial System (FFS) and are presented in accordance with the form and content for entity financial statements specified by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in OMB Bulletin 94-01 and the CDFI Fund’s accounting policies which are summarized in this note. A Statement of Budgetary Resources and Actual Expenses is not included in the principal statements. Treasury organizations received a waiver from the OMB for this requirement.

 

**Reporting Entity**The CDFI Fund was created as a bipartisan initiative in the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (Public Law No. 103-325). The CDFI Fund was originally created to be a separate, independent wholly owned government corporation subject to the audit and reporting requirements of the Government Corporation Control Act (31 U.S.C. 9105 and 9106). However, the CDFI Fund was placed in the Treasury (Chapter X of title I, Public Law No. 104-19) and began operations as of July 27, 1995.

The CDFI Fund operates various programs aimed to expand the availability of credit, investment capital, financial, and other services in distressed urban, rural, and Native American communities. The Fund is intended to help create a national network of financial institutions dedicated to community development that leverages private resources (financial and human) to address community development needs.

The CDFI Program uses limited public resources to invest in private, for-profit and non-profit financial institutions. This investment helps build the capacity of local CDFIs by leveraging large amounts of private capital and builds on private-sector talent, creativity, and leadership. CDFI program awards may take the form of grants, direct loans, equity investments or technical assistance to eligible financial institutions.

The Bank Enterprise Awards (BEA) Program provides incentives to insured depository institutions (banks and thrifts) to invest in CDFIs and to increase their lending and financial services in distressed communities. Program participants are selected based on projected achievements. The awards are given only after the activities have been implemented successfully, to ensure that only completed activities are recognized and that the Fund’s limited dollars are effectively leveraged with private capital.

These programs are funded under the following two appropriations:

- 20 Y/Y 1881, annual two-year appropriation for CDFI Fund operations; and20 X 4088, no-year appropriation for tracking financing account transactions.

The CDFI Fund has developed the Presidential Awards for Excellence in Microenterprise Development under the authority of a 1995 Presidential Memorandum to the Secretary of the Treasury. This Microenterprise initiative is designed to help improve the quality of organizations that provide financing and services to the nation’s smallest businesses. These non-monetary awards are designed to provide recognition and share lessons learned from outstanding programs in the field of microenterprise development.

 

**Basis of Accounting**The CDFI Fund’s financial statements are accounted for in accordance with the following hierarchy which constitutes an other comprehensive basis of accounting other than generally accepted accounting principles:

- Individual standards agreed to by the Director of OMB, the Controller General, and the Secretary of the Treasury and published by OMB and the General Accounting Office.
- Form and Content requirements included in OMB Bulletin No. 94-01, dated November 16, 1993 and applicable requirements from 97-01 dated October 16, 1996;
- Accounting principles and standards published by the Department of the Treasury accounting policy and procedures manuals which are prevalent practices; and
- Accounting principles published by other Federal and private sector authoritative standard setting bodies and authoritative sources.

The Fund reports on an accrual basis and a budgetary basis. Under the accrual basis, revenues are recognized when earned and expenses are recognized when a liability is incurred, without regard to receipt or payment of cash.

 

**Revenues and Other Financing Sources**The CDFI Fund receives the majority of its funding through appropriations from the U.S. Congress. The Fund receives both annual and no-year appropriations that may be used, within statutory limits, for operating expenditures. A portion of the appropriation may be used for the cost of direct loans and the administrative expenses to carry out the direct loan program.

Additional revenues are obtained from interest received on direct loans to the public and on uninvested funds in the direct loan financing account with the Treasury.

Appropriations are recognized as revenues to the extent expenditures covered by budgetary resources are incurred. Subsidy interest revenue is recognized and interest differential amortized, when interest paid is greater than interest received as a result of the CDFI Fund providing direct loans to the public.

 

**Fund Balances with Treasury**The CDFI Fund does not maintain cash in commercial bank accounts. Cash receipts and disbursements are processed by the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Fund Balances with Treasury are comprised primarily of appropriated and credit reform funds (financing and program accounts), which are available to pay current liabilities and finance authorized grant awards and other credit reform commitments.**Advances and Prepayments**Payments in advance of the receipt of goods and services are recorded as prepaid charges at the time of prepayment and recognized as expenses when the related goods and services are received.**Investments**In certain instances, the CDFI Fund provides assistance by purchasing non-voting, equity investments in for-profit CDFI Program awardees. The CDFI Fund is restricted from owning more than 50 percent of the equity of an awardee and can not control its operations. Investments are initially recorded at cost, and adjusted to market value based on reported market prices or other relevant financial information available for the investees at each year end. At September 30, 1997, cost and market values are the same due to the short duration the investments have been held by the CDFI Fund.**Credit Program Receivables**In certain instances, the CDFI Fund provides assistance by direct loans to CDFI Program awardees.Direct loans are accounted for on a present value basis as required by the Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standard (SSFAS) No.2 . The use of the present value accounting method is consistent with the intent of the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990. Loans are reported as receivables when disbursed, reduced by an allowance equal to the present value of the subsidy cost associated with the loans. Subsidy costs include the present value of the interest rate differential between the loan and the Treasury borrowing rates, the estimated delinquencies and defaults net of estimated recoveries, the offset from fees, and other estimated cash flows.**Interest Receivable**Interest income is accrued at the contractual rate on the outstanding credit program receivable principal balances.**Property and Equipment**Office space in the building in which the CDFI Fund administrative offices are located is leased through the General Services Administration. GSA charges the Fund rent that approximates the commercial rental for similar properties.

Equipment purchased, transferred or donated with a cost greater than or equal to $50,000 per unit and a useful life of two years or more is capitalized at cost and depreciated. However, at September 30, 1997, the Fund has no capitalizable equipment or other property. Other equipment is expensed when purchased. Normal repairs and maintenance are charged to expense as incurred.

 

**Liabilities**Liabilities represent the amount of monies or other resources that are likely to be paid by the CDFI Fund as a result of a transaction or event that has already occurred. Liabilities for which an appropriation has not yet been enacted are classified as unfunded liabilities.**Debt**Debt represents borrowings payable to the Treasury resulting from loans from the Treasury to fund direct loans made by the CDFI Program. These borrowings are accounted for in the financing account (20 X 4088), which is required to make annual principal payments to the Treasury based on the collections of loans receivable.**Interest Payable**The CDFI Fund financing account (20 X 4088) records interest payable to the Treasury for related borrowings. The CDFI Fund is required to make annual interest payments to the Treasury.**Annual, Sick, and Other Leave**Annual leave and compensatory leave is accrued as a liability when earned, and the accrual is reduced as leave is taken. The balance in this accrued liability account is computed using current pay rates. Sick leave and other types of non-vested leave are expensed as the leave is taken.**Retirement Plans**CDFI Fund employees participate in the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS) or Federal Employees’ Retirement System (FERS). The FERS was established by the enactment of Public Law 99-335. Pursuant to this law, most employees hired after December 31, 1983, are automatically covered by FERS and Social Security. Employees hired prior to January 1, 1984, elected to join either FERS and Social Security or remain in CSRS.

All employees are eligible to contribute to the Thrift Savings Plan (TSP). For those employees participating in the FERS, a TSP account is automatically established, and the CDFI Fund makes a mandatory 1 percent contribution to this account. In addition, the Fund makes matching contributions, ranging from 1 to 4 percent, for FERS eligible employees who contribute to their TSP account. Matching contributions are not made to the TSP accounts established by CSRS employees.

FERS employees and certain CSRS reinstatement employees are eligible to participate in the Social Security program for retirement. In these instances, the Fund remits the employer’s share of the required contribution. For Fund employees participating in CSRS, the Fund makes matching contributions to CSRS equal to 7 percent of base pay.

The Fund does not report information pertaining to the retirement plans covering its employees in its financial statements. Reporting amounts such as plan assets, accumulated plan benefits, or unfunded liabilities, if any, is the responsibility of the Office of Personnel Management. However, as a result of Statements of Federal Financial Accounting Standard (SSFAS) No. 5, which is effective for fiscal year 1997, the CDFI Fund is required to report the full cost of providing pension benefits to include the cost financed by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). For 1997, the CDFI Fund paid $94,901 for retirement benefits, which approximated the full cost of these benefits.

Similar to Federal Retirement plans, OPM, rather than the CDFI Fund, reports the liability of future payments to retired employees who participate in the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program (FEHBP) and Federal Employees Group Life Insurance (FEGLI) Program. As a result of SSFAS No. 5, the CDFI Fund is required to report the full cost of providing other retirement benefits (ORB). Currently the CDFI Fund does not contribute funds to cover the cost of providing health benefits and life insurance to its retirees (see Note 7).

SSFAS No. 5 also requires the CDFI Fund to recognize an expense and liability for other post employment benefits (OPEB), which include all types of benefits provided to former or inactive (but not retired) employees, their beneficiaries, and covered dependents. The CDFI Fund recognizes an expense and liability for OPEB when a future outflow or other sacrifice of resources is probable and measurable on the basis of events occurring on or before the end of the fiscal year. At September 30, 1997, the CDFI Fund had no liability for OPEB.

 

**Awards Payable**CDFI program grant expense is recognized and awards payable are recorded when the CDFI Fund is made aware, in writing, of the awardee’s matching funds commitment and an executed agreement is signed. BEA grant expense is recognized and awards payable are recorded at the end of the assessment period in which the awardees demonstrate completion of qualified activities.**Tax Status**The CDFI Fund, as a government corporation, is not subject to federal, state, or local income taxes and, accordingly, no provision for income tax is recorded.**Contingencies**The CDFI Fund may be a party in various administrative proceedings, legal actions, and claims brought by or against it. The Fund’s management and legal counsel are unaware of any contingencies that would materially affect the CDFI’s financial position or results of operations.**Use of Estimates**The preparation of the financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingencies at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the period. Actual results could differ from these estimates.**Note 2. Fund Balances with Treasury**Fund balances with Treasury as of September 30, 1997, 1996 and 1995, consists of the following:**FY 1997**

Unobligated

Obligated

 

Available

 

Restricted

 

Total

Appropriated

20 7/8 1881

$

14,554,369

$

35,445,631

$

 

$

50,000,000

20 6/7 1881

 

42,174,711

84,443

 

42,259,154

20 5/6 1881

 

11,103,406

422,093

 

11,525,499

20 X 4088

 

1,142,029

1,142,029

Fund Balances

$

68,974,515

$

35,445,631

$

$506,536

$

104,926,682

**FY 1996**

Unobligated

Obligated

 

Available

 

Restricted

 

Total

Appropriated

20 6/7 1881

$

 

$

45,000,000

$

 

$

45,000,000

20 5/6 1881

 

47,865,288

411,597

 

48,276,885

Fund Balances

$

47,865,288

$

45,000,000

$

411,597

$

93,276,885

**FY 1995**

Unobligated

Obligated

 

Available

 

Restricted

 

Total

Appropriated

20 5/6 1881

$

48,015

$

49,891,257

$

 

$

49,939,272

Fund Balances

$

48,015

$

49,891,257

$

 

$

49,939,272

**Note 3. Credit Program Receivables**The CDFI Fund operates the CDFI Program to facilitate the flow of capital into distressed communities. The CDFI Program invests in a variety of forms, including equity loans, grants, deposits and credit union shares, depending on market needs and the ability of individual local CDFIs to raise matching funds in comparable form.

Direct loan obligations and the resulting direct loans are governed by the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990. The Act provides that the present value of the subsidy costs (i.e. interest rate differentials, interest subsidies, estimated delinquencies and defaults, fee offsets and other cash flows) associated with direct loans be recognized as a cost in the year the direct or guaranteed loan is disbursed. An analysis of fiscal year 1997 credit program receivables and the nature and amounts of the subsidy and administrative costs associated with the direct loans is provided below.

Credit Program Receivables as of September 30, 1997, are as follows:

Loan Program

 

Loans Receivable, Gross

 

Allowance for Subsidy Cost (PV)

 

Value of Assets Related to Direct Loans

CDFI

$

3,600,000

$

1,339,108

$

2,260,892

Total

$

3,600,000

$

1,339,108

$

2,260,892

**Subsidy Expense Related to Current Year’s Direct Loans**Loan Program

OriginalInterestDifferential

Estimated

Defaults

Total

 

Less

Amortizationof Interest

Differential

Total

CDFI

$

$810,670

 

569,140

 

1,379,810

 

40,702

$

$1,339,108

Total

$

$810,670

 

569,140

 

1,379,810

 

40.702

$

$1,339,108

**Direct Loan Modifications and Reestimates**Loan Program

 

Modifications

 

Reestimates

CDFI

$

0

$

0

The subsidy cost allowance was not re-estimated as of September 30, 1997, because less than 90% of loans in the 96 Cohort have been disbursed as of September 30, 1997. No modifications occurred during fiscal year 1997.

 

**Total Direct Loan Subsidy Expenses**Loan Program

 

Total

CDFI

$

1,339,108

**Administrative Expense for Direct Loans**Loan Program

 

Total

CDFI

$

300,000

The CDFI Fund did not provide direct loans in fiscal years 1996 and 1995. Management estimated approximately 7 percent of total administrative expenses related to the cost of administrating direct loans. Loan commitments and related subsidies as of September 30, 1997 were $4,260,000 and $2,025,181, respectively.

**Note 4. Debt**Debt as of September 30, 1997, is as follows:

BeginningBalance

Oct 1, 1996

 

New Borrowings

 

Repayments

 

EndingBalance

Sep 30, 1997

Borrowings from the Treasury

$

0

$

3,712,601

 

-

$

3,712,601

Total Debt

$

0

$

3,712,601

 

-

$

3,712,601

The CDFI Fund did not borrow funds from the Treasury in fiscal years 1996 and 1995.

**Note 5. Net Position**Net Position as of September 30, 1997, 1996 and 1995 is as follows:

1997

Credit Reform

 

Appropriated

 

1996

 

1995

Net Position:

Unexpended Appropriations:

Unobligated Available

$

 

$

35,445,631

$

45,000,000

$

49,891,257

Unobligated Unavailable

506,536

 

422,093

Undelivered Orders

 

2,025,181

 

45,668,003

 

38,206,444

 

26,074

Invested Capital

5,996,900

Future Funding Requirements

(61,727)

 

(34,288)

 

(4,489)

Total Net Position

$

2,025,181

$

87,555,343

$

83,594,249

$

49,912,842

The components of net position are as follows:

Unexpended Appropriations: This amount includes the portion of the CDFI Fund’s appropriations represented by undelivered orders and unobligated balances. Undelivered orders do not include loan obligation balances, as loans are funded primarily from borrowings from the Treasury, but do include $2,025,181 related to the subsidy portion of loans that have been obligated but not disbursed. Once the loans are disbursed, the subsidy portion will be expensed. Unobligated balances include both available and unavailable amounts.

Invested Capital: This amount includes $5,996,900 of equity investments in local CDFIs. The CDFI Program purchases non-voting equity investments in for-profit awardees. The investments are transferable and may be converted to voting stock upon transfer.

Future Funding Requirements: This amount reflects liabilities reported in the Statements of Financial Position which are not covered by available budgetary resources.

**Note 6. Operating Leases**The CDFI Fund leases office space from the General Services Administration in the Homer Building located in Washington DC at 601 13th Street, NW. The lease will terminate January 8, 2002. Future payments due for operating leases on buildings and office space as of September 30, 1997 are as follows:

Fiscal Year

 

Estimated Cost

1998

$

443,227

1999

 

458,740

2000

 

474,795

2001

 

491,413

2002

 

127,153

Total

$

1,995,328

Rent expense for 1997 totaled $445,000. CDFI Fund did not incur operating lease expense in fiscal years 1996 and 1995.

**Note 7. Other Revenues and Financing Sources**Other revenue and financing sources as of September 30, 1997 are as follows:

1997

Imputed Financing Sources:

Post Retirement Benefits

$

27,548

Total Other Revenues and Financing Sources

$

27,548

**Post Retirement Benefits**Post Retirement Benefits are imputed from three basic sources; pension expense, health insurance expense, and life insurance expense. The total cost of providing pension benefits as provided by OPM was covered by amounts contributed by the CDFI Fund and its employees. Therefore, there was no additional pension expense or imputed financing source in the CDFI Fund’s financial statements for fiscal year 1997. The fiscal year 1997 FEHBP cost factor per employee enrolled in the FEHBP is $2,493 which is provided by OPM on a per employee basis because the benefits do not depend on future salary levels of individual employees. The FEHBP ORB amount totaling $27,423 is included as an expense and imputed financing source in the CDFI Fund’s financial statements for fiscal year 1997. The fiscal year 1997 FEGLI cost factor for employees enrolled in the FEGLI program is 0.02 percent of their basic pay. The FEGLI ORB amount totaling $125 is included as an expense and imputed financing source in the CDFI Fund’s financial statements for fiscal year 1997. Reporting post retirement benefits was not required in fiscal years 1996 and 1995.**Note 8. Operating Expenses**Operating expenses by object classification for the periods ended September 30, 1997, 1996 and 1995 are as follows:

1997

 

1996

 

1995

Personnel Compensation

$

880,052

$

584,144

$

313,180

Personnel Benefits

 

243,782

 

136,766

 

54,623

Travel and Transportation of Persons

 

25,901

 

75,766

Transportation of Things

 

5,000

 

2,357

 

7,289

Rents, Communication, and Utilities

 

539,945

 

161,391

Printing and Reproduction

 

21,527

 

48,825

 

1,148

Other Services*

 

2,709,253

 

637,170

 

15,879

Supplies and Materials

 

33,304

 

21,242

 

2,809

Acquisition of Machinery and Equipment

 

187,809

 

225,263

 

47,415

Grants

 

37,975,807

 

9,425,453

Subsidies

 

1,379,810

Total Operating Expenses

$

44,002,190

$

11,318,377

$

442,343

*Other Services include management support and contractual services, training, repairs and maintenance,

and leasehold improvements.

As of September 30, 1997, CDFI has committed to awarding $37,332,825 in grants. These grant awards are in the approval process and have not yet been disbursed.

**Note 9. Non-Operating Changes**Non-operating changes consist of increases and decreases in the components of net position that are not reported in the operating statement. The following table identifies the components of the non-operating changes for the periods ended September 30, 1997, 1996 and 1995:

1997

 

1996

 

1995

Increase:

Appropriation Received

$

50,000,000

$

45,000,000

$

50,355,185

Decrease:

Appropriation Used

 

43,947,778

 

11,288,794

 

437,854

Net Non-Operating Change

$

6,052,222

$

33,711,206

$

49,917,331

**Appendix A
FY 1997 Awards CDFI Awards ACCION El Paso
El Paso, TX
$130,000 Grant
$200,000 Loan
Provides business loans of $250-$25,000 to disenfranchised, low-income, and minority entrepreneurs in El Paso County unable to access business credit from the formal banking sector.**

Provides business loans of $250-$25,000 to disenfranchised, low-income, and minority entrepreneurs in El Paso County unable to access business credit from the formal banking sector.

**Alaska Growth Capital BIDCO
Anchorage, AK
$1,000,000 Equity Investment
Provides financing for business and economic development projects in rural, low-income communities, primarily Alaska Native.**

Provides financing for business and economic development projects in rural, low-income communities, primarily Alaska Native.

**Albina Community Bank
Portland, OR
$400,000 Equity Investment
Serves residential and commercial credit needs of primarily low-to- moderate income residents of north and northeast Portland, Oregon.**

Serves residential and commercial credit needs of primarily low-to- moderate income residents of north and northeast Portland, Oregon.

**Alternatives
Federal Credit Union
Ithaca, NY
$750,000 Grant
$57,000 Technical Assistance
Provides a full range of products and development services to members in Ithaca and Tompkins County.**

Provides a full range of products and development services to members in Ithaca and Tompkins County.

**Boston Community Capital, Inc.
(formerly BCFL, Inc.)
Jamaica Plains, MA
$435,000 Grant
$565,000 Equity Investment
Serves credit and investment needs to low-income communities in the Boston area by providing loans for housing development, community facilities, and working capital to human service organizations.**

Serves credit and investment needs to low-income communities in the Boston area by providing loans for housing development, community facilities, and working capital to human service organizations.

**Boston Bank of Commerce
Boston, MA
$750,000 Equity
Serves community development needs throughout the Boston metropolitan area, primarily in African-American neighborhoods.**

Serves community development needs throughout the Boston metropolitan area, primarily in African-American neighborhoods.

**Central Appalachian Peoples Federal Credit Union
Berea, KY
$425,000 Grant
$100,000 Loan
$50,000 Technical Assistance Works with affiliates and other nonprofit community organizations to provide a full range of products and development services, including consumer financial services, to its members in the rural Appalachian regions of Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia. Chowan Credit Union, Inc.
Edenton, NC
$150,000 Grant
$25,000 Technical Assistance Concentrates on loans for homeownership, home improvement, and small businesses among its membership from the largely rural service area of Chowan, Pasquotank, and Gates counties. Coastal Enterprises, Inc.
Wiscasset, ME
$2,500,000 Grant
Creates jobs, affordable housing, and community facilities for low-income people in distressed communities of Maine.**

Creates jobs, affordable housing, and community facilities for low-income people in distressed communities of Maine.

**College Height Credit Union
Fayetteville, NC
$175,000 Grant
$30,000 Technical Assistance
Provides access to financial services and loans, including auto and home improvement loans, to low-income membership in Fayetteville and surrounding Cumberland County.**

Provides access to financial services and loans, including auto and home improvement loans, to low-income membership in Fayetteville and surrounding Cumberland County.

**Colorado Enterprise Fund
Denver, CO
$250,000 Grant
$25,000 Technical Assistance
Provides capital and technical assistance to socially and economically disadvantaged small business owners unable to access traditional bank financing in the Denver metro area.**

Provides capital and technical assistance to socially and economically disadvantaged small business owners unable to access traditional bank financing in the Denver metro area.

**Community Investment Corporation
Chicago, IL
$1,000,000 Grant
Researches community credit needs and creates loan products to meet those needs. Provides single-family rehab loans in targeted Chicago neighborhoods, offers multifamily loans, and makes available a flexible pool of funds to facilitate the rehabilitation of multifamily buildings in communities not previously served by existing loan products.**

Researches community credit needs and creates loan products to meet those needs. Provides single-family rehab loans in targeted Chicago neighborhoods, offers multifamily loans, and makes available a flexible pool of funds to facilitate the rehabilitation of multifamily buildings in communities not previously served by existing loan products.

**Community Loan Fund
of New Jersey, Inc.
Trenton, NJ
$800,000 Grant
$400,000 Loan
$30,000 Technical Assistance
Increases access of capital to low-income people to facilitate self-sufficiency, and provides gap financing and development services to nonprofit, community-based developers of affordable housing, community facilities and small business enterprises.**

Increases access of capital to low-income people to facilitate self-sufficiency, and provides gap financing and development services to nonprofit, community-based developers of affordable housing, community facilities and small business enterprises.

**Community Ventures Corporation
Lexington, KY
$350,000 Grant
Provides loans for downpayments, closing costs, and lease-purchase programs targeted to low-income, first-time homebuyers and loans to small businesses and microenterprises throughout the Kentucky Bluegrass region.**

Provides loans for downpayments, closing costs, and lease-purchase programs targeted to low-income, first-time homebuyers and loans to small businesses and microenterprises throughout the Kentucky Bluegrass region.

**Cooperatives Business Assistance Corporation
Camden, NJ
$500,000 Grant
$500,000 Loan
Provides capital to start-up businesses, makes microenter-prise, commercial business, and longer-term fixed asset loans, and assists with technical support to the businesses it finances.**

Provides capital to start-up businesses, makes microenter-prise, commercial business, and longer-term fixed asset loans, and assists with technical support to the businesses it finances.

**Enterprise Development Corporation
The Plains, OH
$125,000 Grant
Provides loans, training, and technical assistance to emerging businesses owned by low-income, women, and minority residents in a 30-county, largely rural region of Appalachian Ohio.**

Provides loans, training, and technical assistance to emerging businesses owned by low-income, women, and minority residents in a 30-county, largely rural region of Appalachian Ohio.

**Enterprise Foundation
Columbia, MD
$2,500,000 Grant
Provides loans and technical assistance to nonprofit developers of affordable housing serving distressed areas of 16 cities across the nation.**

Provides loans and technical assistance to nonprofit developers of affordable housing serving distressed areas of 16 cities across the nation.

**Housing Development Fund of Lower Fairfield County
Stamford, CT
$78,500 Grant
Provides below market-rate construction and permanent financing of affordable housing in Fairfield County, Connecticut.**

Provides below market-rate construction and permanent financing of affordable housing in Fairfield County, Connecticut.

**Institute for Community Economics, Inc.
Springfield, MA
$1,125,000 Grant
$96,100 Technical Assistance
Provides both financial services and technical assistance to community-based organizations developing resident-controlled, permanently affordable housing.**

Provides both financial services and technical assistance to community-based organizations developing resident-controlled, permanently affordable housing.

**Jackson/Hinds Minority Capital Fund, Inc.
Jackson, MS
$700,000 Grant
Provides financing and technical assistance to minority-owned businesses located in the Jackson, Mississippi area.**

Provides financing and technical assistance to minority-owned businesses located in the Jackson, Mississippi area.

**Leviticus 25:23 Alternative Fund, Inc.
Yonkers, NY
$250,000 Grant
Makes credit available to non-profit community development organizations providing services to low-income families, individuals, and neighborhoods unable to access conventional credit markets.**

Makes credit available to non-profit community development organizations providing services to low-income families, individuals, and neighborhoods unable to access conventional credit markets.

**Local Initiatives Support Corporation
New York, NY
$1,000,000 Grant
Assists community development corporations in efforts to transform distressed neighbor-hoods in urban and rural locations throughout the country.**

Assists community development corporations in efforts to transform distressed neighbor-hoods in urban and rural locations throughout the country.

**Low Income Housing Fund
San Francisco, CA
$165,000 Technical Assistance
Provides capital for affordable housing in low-income communities in over 20 states around the country.**

Provides capital for affordable housing in low-income communities in over 20 states around the country.

**Minority Investment Development Corporation
Providence, RI
$750,000 Equity Investment
Lends to minority and disadvantaged entrepreneurs throughout the state, providing needed subordinated debt and quasi-equity financing.**

Lends to minority and disadvantaged entrepreneurs throughout the state, providing needed subordinated debt and quasi-equity financing.

**National Community Capital Association
Philadelphia, PA
$1,750,000 Grant
Assists nonprofit CDFIs financing housing and economic development in low-income communities across the nation.**

Assists nonprofit CDFIs financing housing and economic development in low-income communities across the nation.

**National Federation of Community Development Credit Union
New York, NY
$3,250,000 Grant
Provides funding and technical assistance to its 154 member community development credit unions operating in low-income communities in 35 states.**

Provides funding and technical assistance to its 154 member community development credit unions operating in low-income communities in 35 states.

**Neighborhood Bancorporation
San Diego, CA
$1,500,000 Equity Investment
Facilitates the revitalization of low-income and minority neighborhoods in San Diego.**

Facilitates the revitalization of low-income and minority neighborhoods in San Diego.

**Neighborhood Housing Services of Chicago, Inc.
Chicago, IL
$966,700 Grant
Provides loans to rehabilitate and purchase single and multi-family homes in minority and low-to-moderate income areas of Chicago.**

Provides loans to rehabilitate and purchase single and multi-family homes in minority and low-to-moderate income areas of Chicago.

**New Mexico Community Loan Fund
Albuquerque, NM
$600,000 Grant
Provides loans and technical assistance to low-income people and community-based organizations across the state, focusing in rural communities.**

Provides loans and technical assistance to low-income people and community-based organizations across the state, focusing in rural communities.

**Northcountry Cooperative Development Fund
Minneapolis, MN
$185,000 Equity Investment
Promotes economic equity and community stability by making loans to cooperatives across a ten- state region of the Upper Midwest with most borrowers located in low-income communities.**

Promotes economic equity and community stability by making loans to cooperatives across a ten- state region of the Upper Midwest with most borrowers located in low-income communities.

**Northeast Entrepreneur Fund
Virginia, MN
$250,000 Grant
$35,000 Technical Assistance
Provides training, technical assistance, and financing to unemployed and underemployed starting or expanding businesses in the seven-county Arrowhead region of rural northeastern Minnesota.**

Provides training, technical assistance, and financing to unemployed and underemployed starting or expanding businesses in the seven-county Arrowhead region of rural northeastern Minnesota.

**PPEP Microbusiness and Housing Development Corporation
Tucson, AZ
$250,000 Grant
Focuses on credit worthy borrowers who cannot otherwise qualify for mortgages, especially minorities, women head of households, and individuals living in substandard housing, in central and southern Arizona.**

Focuses on credit worthy borrowers who cannot otherwise qualify for mortgages, especially minorities, women head of households, and individuals living in substandard housing, in central and southern Arizona.

**Primary Care Development Corporation
New York, NY
$2,500,000 Grant
Offers financial and technical assistance to non-profit, health care providers building and operating new or expanded primary care facilities throughout medically under-served communities of New York City.**

Offers financial and technical assistance to non-profit, health care providers building and operating new or expanded primary care facilities throughout medically under-served communities of New York City.

**Renaissance Economic Development Corporation
New York, NY
$300,000 Grant
Provides credit access to under-served, low-to-moderate income immigrant and minority communities in New York City.**

Provides credit access to under-served, low-to-moderate income immigrant and minority communities in New York City.

**Rural Community Assistance Corporation
Sacramento, CA
$600,000 Equity
$300,000 Technical Assistance
Serves lower-income, farm workers, and Native American rural communities in 12 western states.**

Serves lower-income, farm workers, and Native American rural communities in 12 western states.

**Sable Bancshares, Inc.
Chicago, IL
$1,000,000 Equity Investment
Combines commercial real estate and residential lending with community development activities to stem business flight and stimulate neighborhood revitalization.**

Combines commercial real estate and residential lending with community development activities to stem business flight and stimulate neighborhood revitalization.

**San Antonio Business Development Fund
San Antonio, TX
$500,000 Grant
Addresses the under-served credit needs of small minority-owned, and women-owned businesses in San Antonio and Bexar Counties.**

Addresses the under-served credit needs of small minority-owned, and women-owned businesses in San Antonio and Bexar Counties.

**Southern Dallas Development Corporation
Dallas, TX
$600,000 Grant
Provides financing and development services in south Dallas and the Dallas Enterprise Zone.**

Provides financing and development services in south Dallas and the Dallas Enterprise Zone.

**St. Luke Credit Union
Windsor, NC
$230,000 Grant
$20,000 Technical Assistance
Serves the predominately African-American community in rural northeastern North Carolina and seeks to link local residents’ savings and community development.**

Serves the predominately African-American community in rural northeastern North Carolina and seeks to link local residents’ savings and community development.

**Tampa Bay Community Reinvestment Corporation
Tampa, FL
$2,500,00 Grant
Provides mortgage loans for affordable multi-family housing in the seven-county Tampa Bay region of Florida.**

Provides mortgage loans for affordable multi-family housing in the seven-county Tampa Bay region of Florida.

**Tri-County Credit Union
Ahoskie, NC
$250,000 Grant
$25,000 Technical Assistance
Provides financial services to predominately African American counties in rural northeastern North Carolina with incomes significantly below the median for the state.**

Provides financial services to predominately African American counties in rural northeastern North Carolina with incomes significantly below the median for the state.

**Unified Singers
Federal Credit Union
Thomasville, GA
$250,000 Grant
$21,000 Technical Assistance
Addresses problems of historic disinvestment and lack of access to conventional credit in the rural African American community of Thomas County Georgia.**

Addresses problems of historic disinvestment and lack of access to conventional credit in the rural African American community of Thomas County Georgia.

**Union Settlement
Federal Credit Union
New York, NY
$200,000 Grant
Provides financing for home ownership, housing cooperatives, and private rental housing as well as small businesses servicing the East Harlem Empowerment Zone of New York City.**

Provides financing for home ownership, housing cooperatives, and private rental housing as well as small businesses servicing the East Harlem Empowerment Zone of New York City.

**United Bank of Philadelphia
Philadelphia, PA
$500,000 Grant
Enhances the credit worthiness of borrowers unable to access to traditional financial service providers and graduate them into the mainstream credit market.**

Enhances the credit worthiness of borrowers unable to access to traditional financial service providers and graduate them into the mainstream credit market.

**Vermont Community Loan Fund, Inc.
Montpelier, VT
$465,000 Grant
$35,000 Technical Assistance
Finances projects across Vermont providing housing and economic opportunities for low-income people.**

Finances projects across Vermont providing housing and economic opportunities for low-income people.

**Vermont development Credit Union
Burlington, VT
$500,000 Grant
Builds community and individual assets for low-income people and disadvantaged communities not served by mainstream financial institutions.**

Builds community and individual assets for low-income people and disadvantaged communities not served by mainstream financial institutions.

**Washington County Council on Economic Development
Washington, PA
$250,000 Grant
Works to unify the efforts of southwestern Pennsylvania’s community development, economic development, and human service agencies to create social change and rebuild the community.**

Works to unify the efforts of southwestern Pennsylvania’s community development, economic development, and human service agencies to create social change and rebuild the community.

**Wendell Phillips Community Development Credit Union
Minneapolis, MN
$80,000 Grant
Focuses on accumulating capital in the community, ensures access to credit for residents, and promotes financial literacy among adults and youth in low-income neighborhoods of Phillips’ in Minneapolis, Minnesota.**

Focuses on accumulating capital in the community, ensures access to credit for residents, and promotes financial literacy among adults and youth in low-income neighborhoods of Phillips’ in Minneapolis, Minnesota.

**BEA Awards Amalgamated Bank
New York, NY
$16,200 Grant
Coordinated the work of nine Neighborhood Housing Services programs in New York City, focusing on mortgages, home repair, and property rehabilitation loans.**

Coordinated the work of nine Neighborhood Housing Services programs in New York City, focusing on mortgages, home repair, and property rehabilitation loans.

**American State Bank
Osceola, AR
$15,000 Grant
Provided patient capital and technical assistance to small businesses, including start-ups and minority-owned enterprises in the very distressed Mississippi Delta regions of Arkansas, Louisiana and Mississippi.**

Provided patient capital and technical assistance to small businesses, including start-ups and minority-owned enterprises in the very distressed Mississippi Delta regions of Arkansas, Louisiana and Mississippi.

**Atlantic Bank, NA
Portland, ME
$15,000 Grant
Promoted job creation for low-income people.**

Promoted job creation for low-income people.

**BankBoston, NA
Boston, MA
$128,300 Grant
Made equity investments and loans to certified CDFIs and expanded its microlending activities.**

Made equity investments and loans to certified CDFIs and expanded its microlending activities.

**Bankers Trust Company
New York, NY
$957,000 Grant
Provided financial support for the third round of lending for National Community Development Initiative boosting the capacity of commu-nity development corporations.**

Provided financial support for the third round of lending for National Community Development Initiative boosting the capacity of commu-nity development corporations.

**Bank of America Community Development Bank
Walnut Creek, CA
$915,333 Grant
Increased multi-family housing, commercial real estate, business loans, and make loans to nonprofit housing developers.**

Increased multi-family housing, commercial real estate, business loans, and make loans to nonprofit housing developers.

**Bank of America, FSB
Portland, OR
$465,178
Provided multi-family housing, commercial real estate, and business loans in distressed communities of Texas, Colorado, New Mexico, Washington, and Arizona.**

Provided multi-family housing, commercial real estate, and business loans in distressed communities of Texas, Colorado, New Mexico, Washington, and Arizona.

**Bank of America, NT & SA
Chicago, IL
$18,000 Grant
Provided operating support to four Chicago CDFIs.**

Provided operating support to four Chicago CDFIs.

**Bath Savings Institution
Bath, ME
$8,250 Grant
Promoted job creation for low-income people and brought capital from the private sector to assist small businesses.**

Promoted job creation for low-income people and brought capital from the private sector to assist small businesses.

**Branch Banking
and Trust Company
Winston Salem, NC
$330,000 Grant
Originated and purchased home loans and small business loans made to low-to-moderate income individuals across North Carolina.**

Originated and purchased home loans and small business loans made to low-to-moderate income individuals across North Carolina.

**California Korea Bank
Los Angeles, CA
$31,250 Grant
Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.**

Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.

**Cambridge Savings Bank
Boston, MA
$1,732 Grant
Provided matching loans to participate in the Working Capital Program.**

Provided matching loans to participate in the Working Capital Program.

**CenFed Bank
Pasadena, CA
$62,500 Grant
Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.**

Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.

**Central Bank
Monroe, LA
$37,500 Grant
Provided patient capital and technical assistance in small business, including start-ups and minority-owned enterprises in the very distressed Mississippi Delta region of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Mississippi.**

Provided patient capital and technical assistance in small business, including start-ups and minority-owned enterprises in the very distressed Mississippi Delta region of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Mississippi.

**Central Bank
of Kansas City
Kansas City, MO
$83,808 Grant
Increased its commercial real estate, business, and agricultural loans within a distressed community.**

Increased its commercial real estate, business, and agricultural loans within a distressed community.

**Central Carolina Bank
Durham, NC
$550,000 Grant
Provided financing for homes, small businesses, and community facilities for low-wealth and underserved individuals and communities across North Carolina.**

Provided financing for homes, small businesses, and community facilities for low-wealth and underserved individuals and communities across North Carolina.

**Chase Manhattan Bank
New York, NY
$960,205 Grant
Provided operating grants, grants for loan loss reserves, and equity investments.**

Provided operating grants, grants for loan loss reserves, and equity investments.

**Chevron Credit Bank
Concord, CA
$9,750 Grant
Promoted affordable housing in the Fairpark and Guadeloupe neighborhood s of Salt Lake City.**

Promoted affordable housing in the Fairpark and Guadeloupe neighborhood s of Salt Lake City.

**Citibank, FSB
San Francisco, CA
$740,156 Grant
Provided multi-family housing loans in distressed areas of San Francisco, Santa Clara County, and West Sacramento, California, Hialeah, Florida, Chicago, Illinois, and Washington, DC.**

Provided multi-family housing loans in distressed areas of San Francisco, Santa Clara County, and West Sacramento, California, Hialeah, Florida, Chicago, Illinois, and Washington, DC.

**Citibank, NA
New York, NY
$2,517,024 Grant
Increased level of community development lending in distressed communities in Brooklyn, Manhattan, and the Bronx.**

Increased level of community development lending in distressed communities in Brooklyn, Manhattan, and the Bronx.

**City National Bank
Los Angeles, CA
$12,500 Grant
Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.**

Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.

**Cole Taylor Bank
Wheeling, IL
$39,480 Grant
Provided second mortgage rehabilitation financing for the Back of the Yards community of Chicago.**

Provided second mortgage rehabilitation financing for the Back of the Yards community of Chicago.

**Community Capital Bank
Brooklyn, NY
$168,796 Grant
Helped low-to-moderate income communities of New York City gain access to credit and banking services in order to assist in the development of their housing and economic infrastructures.**

Helped low-to-moderate income communities of New York City gain access to credit and banking services in order to assist in the development of their housing and economic infrastructures.

**Community Bank
of the Bay
Oakland, CA
$1,657,750 Grant
Made loans for multi-family housing and commercial real estate and increased lending and other services within impoverished neighborhoods.**

Made loans for multi-family housing and commercial real estate and increased lending and other services within impoverished neighborhoods.

**Crestar Bank
Washington, DC
$464,607 Grant
Made grants and provided technical assistance to CDFIs and other community organizations, and increased consumer, multi-family housing, commercial real estate, and business loans in distressed communities.**

Made grants and provided technical assistance to CDFIs and other community organizations, and increased consumer, multi-family housing, commercial real estate, and business loans in distressed communities.

**European American Bank
New York, NY
$1,547,285 Grant
Increases commercial real estate and business loans and provided equity grants to three CDFIs serving New York.**

Increases commercial real estate and business loans and provided equity grants to three CDFIs serving New York.

**Fidelity Federal Bank
Los Angeles, CA
$250,000 Grant
Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.**

Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.

**First Bank of Beverly Hills
Beverly Hills, CA
$19,254 Grant
Increased its multi-family housing loans and loans funding construction of multi-family rental units in Los Angeles.**

Increased its multi-family housing loans and loans funding construction of multi-family rental units in Los Angeles.

**First National Bank
of Phillips County
Helena, AR
$7,500 Grant
Provided patient and technical assistance in small businesses, including start-ups and minority-owned enterprises in the very distressed Mississippi Delta regions of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Mississippi.**

Provided patient and technical assistance in small businesses, including start-ups and minority-owned enterprises in the very distressed Mississippi Delta regions of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Mississippi.

**First Union National Bank
Charlotte, NC
$948,750 Grant
Made equity investments and loans to CDFIs in Florida, Maryland, North Carolina, and Washington, DC.**

Made equity investments and loans to CDFIs in Florida, Maryland, North Carolina, and Washington, DC.

**First National Bank
of Commerce
New Orleans, LA
$112,500 Grant
Provided patient and technical assistance in small businesses, including start-ups and minority-owned enterprises in the very distressed Mississippi Delta region of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Mississippi.**

Provided patient and technical assistance in small businesses, including start-ups and minority-owned enterprises in the very distressed Mississippi Delta region of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Mississippi.

**Florida International Bank
Miami, FL
$13,968 Grant
Made single-family housing and small business loans in the distressed neighborhood of West Perrine in Dade County.**

Made single-family housing and small business loans in the distressed neighborhood of West Perrine in Dade County.

**Girard Savings Bank
Beverly Hills, CA
$98,100 Grant
Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.**

Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.

**Hanmi Bank
Los Angeles, CA
$25,000 Grant
Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.**

Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.

**Harris Trust
and Savings Bank
Chicago, IL
$5,400 Grant
Provided needed operating support to institutions which fund housing and community facilities in the Chicago area.**

Provided needed operating support to institutions which fund housing and community facilities in the Chicago area.

**Kennebunk Savings Bank
Kennebunk, ME
$12,000 Grant
Promoted job creation for low- income people and to bring development capital from the private sector to assist small businesses.**

Promoted job creation for low- income people and to bring development capital from the private sector to assist small businesses.

**Manufacturers and Traders Trust Company
New York, NY
$218,770 Grant
Increased multi-family housing loans in the Harlem, Washington Heights, and Inwood neighbor-hoods of New York City as well as providing operating grants to 13 CDFIs and loans to three CDFIs in the New York area.**

Increased multi-family housing loans in the Harlem, Washington Heights, and Inwood neighbor-hoods of New York City as well as providing operating grants to 13 CDFIs and loans to three CDFIs in the New York area.

**NationsBank of Texas, NA
Dallas, TX
$334,400 Grant
Made loans to three certified CDFIs.**

Made loans to three certified CDFIs.

**NationsBank, NA
Charlotte, NC
$545,600 Grant
Made loans to three certified CDFIs.**

Made loans to three certified CDFIs.

**Norwest Bank
Colorado, NA
Denver, CO
$165,000 Grant
Helped nonprofit organizations increase their affordable housing development capacity.**

Helped nonprofit organizations increase their affordable housing development capacity.

**Ocean National Bank
Kennebunk, ME
$4,500 Grant
Promoted job creation for low income people.**

Promoted job creation for low income people.

**Peoples Heritage Bank
Portland, ME
$30,000 Grant
Promoted job creation for low income people.**

Promoted job creation for low income people.

**People’s Bank of California
Los Angeles, CA
$62,500 Grant
Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.**

Served unmet credit needs by making direct loans for affordable housing projects and other community development activities.

**Pepperell Trust Company
Biddeford, ME
$7,500 Grant
Promoted job creation for low income people.**

Promoted job creation for low income people.

**Republic National Bank
New York, NY
$371,550 Grant
Provided loans and operating grants to 20 CDFIs serving New York and also placed non-member deposits with 4 community development credit unions.**

Provided loans and operating grants to 20 CDFIs serving New York and also placed non-member deposits with 4 community development credit unions.

**Republic Bank
California, NA
Beverly Hills, CA
$52,618 Grant
Made equity investments with three certified CDFIs and loans to four CDFIs.**

Made equity investments with three certified CDFIs and loans to four CDFIs.

**Republic Bank
& Trust Company
Louisville, KY
$1,100 Grant
Provided low income individuals with opportunities to lease or purchase single family properties.**

Provided low income individuals with opportunities to lease or purchase single family properties.

**Roosevelt Savings Bank
Garden City, NY
$2,250 Grant
Financed affordable housing and promotes community revitalization.**

Financed affordable housing and promotes community revitalization.

**Simmons First
National Bank
Pine Bluff, AK
$30,000 Grant
Provided patient and technical assistance in small businesses, including start-ups and minority-owned enterprises in the very distressed Mississippi Delta regions of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Mississippi.**

Provided patient and technical assistance in small businesses, including start-ups and minority-owned enterprises in the very distressed Mississippi Delta regions of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Mississippi.

**The South Shore Bank
of Chicago
Chicago, IL
$713,920 Grant
Increased consumer, multi-family, and business loans in Chicago’s distressed communities.**

Increased consumer, multi-family, and business loans in Chicago’s distressed communities.

**The Northern Trust Company
Chicago, IL
$425,500 Grant
Made grants, loans, and equity investments in five certified CDFIs.**

Made grants, loans, and equity investments in five certified CDFIs.

**Trustmark National Bank
Jackson, MS
$150,000 Grant
Provided patient and technical assistance in small businesses, including start-ups and minority-owned enterprises in the very distressed Mississippi Delta regions of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Mississippi.**

Provided patient and technical assistance in small businesses, including start-ups and minority-owned enterprises in the very distressed Mississippi Delta regions of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Mississippi.

**Wainwright Bank and Trust Company
Boston, MA
$60,385 Grant
Increased its multi-family housing and commercial loans and provided community services within distressed neighborhoods of Boston.**

Increased its multi-family housing and commercial loans and provided community services within distressed neighborhoods of Boston.

**Washington Federal Savings Bank
Washington, PA
$83,250 Grant
Made business loans of less than $25,000 to low and moderate income people.  **

Made business loans of less than $25,000 to low and moderate income people.

**Appendix B Certified CDFIs**The following list of 196 organizations have been certified by the Fund as Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs).

Certification as a CDFI means that an organization meets the CDFI eligibility requirements. The current CDFI eligibility requirements as set forth in the CDFI Program regulations at 12 CFR Section 1805.200 and are more fully described at 12 CFR Section 1805.701(b). These requirements relate to an organization'’ having a primary mission of promoting community development, predominantly serving and maintaining accountability to eligible target markets, being a financing entity, providing development services and not being a government entity. Certification does not constitute an opinion by the Fund as to the effectiveness or financial viability of the certified organization.

**ALASKA (2) Alaska Growth Capital BIDCO, Inc.
201 Arctic Slope Avenue
Suite 100
Anchorage, AK 99518**

201 Arctic Slope AvenueSuite 100Anchorage, AK 99518

**Tinaa Corporation
320 West Willoughby Avenue Suite 300
Juneau, AK 99801**

320 West Willoughby Avenue Suite 300Juneau, AK 99801

**ALABAMA (4) Demopolis Federal Credit Union
Post Office Box 727
Demopolis, AL 36732**

Post Office Box 727Demopolis, AL 36732

**Federation of Greene County Employees' Federal Credit Union
Post Office Box 543
Eutaw, AL 35462**

Post Office Box 543Eutaw, AL 35462

**Prichard Federal Credit Union
Post Office Box 10576
Prichard, AL 36610**

Post Office Box 10576Prichard, AL 36610

**Stillman Community Development Federal Credit Union
Post Office Box 3148
Tuscaloosa, AL 35403**

Post Office Box 3148Tuscaloosa, AL 35403

**ARKANSAS (2) Southern Development Bancorporation
605 Main Street
Arkadelphia, AR 71923**

605 Main StreetArkadelphia, AR 71923

**College Station Community Federal Credit Union
Post Office Box 599
College Station, AR 72053**

Post Office Box 599College Station, AR 72053

**ARIZONA (3) Hopi Credit Association
Post Office Box 1259
Keams Canyon, AZ 86034**

Post Office Box 1259Keams Canyon, AZ 86034

**PPEP Microbusiness and Housing Development Corporation
802 E. 46th Street
Tucson, AZ 85713**

802 E. 46th StreetTucson, AZ 85713

**First American Credit Union
Post Office Box 1169
Window Rock, AZ 86515**

Post Office Box 1169Window Rock, AZ 86515

**CALIFORNIA (14) The Clearinghouse CDFI
23861 El Toro Road
Suite 207
Lake Forest, CA 92630**

23861 El Toro RoadSuite 207 Lake Forest, CA 92630

**Community Thrift & Loan
5444 East Olympic Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA 90022**

5444 East Olympic Boulevard Los Angeles, CA 90022

**FAME Assistance Corporation (d.b.a. FAME Renaissance)
2270 South Harvard Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA 90018**

2270 South Harvard Boulevard Los Angeles, CA 90018

**NHS Neighborhood Lending Services
3111 South Flower Street
Los Angeles, CA 90007**

3111 South Flower Street Los Angeles, CA 90007

**South Central People's Federal Credit Union
3001 West Vernon Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90008**

3001 West Vernon Avenue Los Angeles, CA 90008

**Community Bank of the Bay
492 Ninth Street, Suite 260
Oakland, CA 94607**

492 Ninth Street, Suite 260 Oakland, CA 94607

**Rural Community Assistance Corporation
2125 19th Street, Suite 203
Sacramento, CA 95818**

2125 19th Street, Suite 203 Sacramento, CA 95818

**ACCION San Diego
1250 6th Avenue, Suite 1000
San Diego, CA 92101-4313**

1250 6th Avenue, Suite 1000 San Diego, CA 92101-4313

**Mission Area Federal Credit Union
2940 16th Street, Suite 305
San Francisco, CA 94103**

2940 16th Street, Suite 305San Francisco, CA 94103

**Northeast Community Federal Credit Union
19 Walter U. Lum Place
San Francisco, CA 94108**

19 Walter U. Lum Place San Francisco, CA 94108

**Northern California Community Loan Fund
383 Rhode Island Street
San Francisco, CA 94103**

383 Rhode Island Street San Francisco, CA 94103

**The Low Income Housing Fund
74 New Montgomery Street, Suite 250
San Francisco, CA 94105**

74 New Montgomery Street, Suite 250San Francisco, CA 94105

**Lenders for Community Development
111 West Saint John Street, Suite 230
San Jose, CA 95113**

111 West Saint John Street, Suite 230San Jose, CA 95113

**Santa Cruz Community Credit Union
512 Front Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95060**

512 Front Street Santa Cruz, CA 95060

**COLORADO (2) Colorado Enterprise Fund (formerly Greater Denver Local Development Corporation)
1888 Sherman Street
Suite 530
Denver, CO 80201-2135**

(formerly Greater Denver Local Development Corporation)1888 Sherman StreetSuite 530Denver, CO 80201-2135

**Saguache County Credit Union
Highway 17
Post Office Building
PO Box 337D
Moffat, CO 81143**

Highway 17Post Office Building PO Box 337DMoffat, CO 81143

**CONNECTICUT (4) Connecticut Housing Investment Fund, Inc.
121 Tremont Street
Hartford, CT 06105**

121 Tremont Street Hartford, CT 06105

**Cooperative Fund of New England
Post Office Box 412
Hartford, CT 06141-0412**

Post Office Box 412 Hartford, CT 06141-0412

**Housing Development Fund of Lower Fairfield County, Inc.
300 Main Street
Stamford, CT 06901**

300 Main Street Stamford, CT 06901

**Need Action Federal Action Credit Union
106 Grove Street
Waterbury, CT 06710**

106 Grove Street Waterbury, CT 06710

**DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA (4) FINCA USA, Inc.
1101 14 th Street, NW
11 th Floor
Washington, DC 20005**

1101 14 Street, NW11 FloorWashington, DC 20005

**Housing Assistance Council
1025 Vermont Avenue, NW, Suite 606
Washington, DC 20005**

1025 Vermont Avenue, NW, Suite 606Washington, DC 20005

**Unitarian Universalist Affordable Housing Corporation
2201 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20037**

2201 P Street, NW Washington, DC 20037

**Washington Area Community Investment Fund
2201 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20037**

2201 P Street, NW Washington, DC 20037

**DELAWARE (2) First State Community Loan Fund
300 Delaware Avenue
Suite 219
Wilmington, DE 19801**

300 Delaware AvenueSuite 219Wilmington, DE 19801

**Intrust USA, Ltd.
Three Mill Road, Suite 105
Wilmington, DE 19806**

Three Mill Road, Suite 105Wilmington, DE 19806

**FLORIDA (4) Lee County Employment & Economic Development Corporation
2121 West First Street
Fort Myers, FL 33902-2285**

2121 West First StreetFort Myers, FL 33902-2285

**BAC Funding Corporation
6600 NW 27th Avenue
Miami, FL 33147**

6600 NW 27th AvenueMiami, FL 33147

**Florida Community Loan Fund, Inc.
Post Office Box 22332
St. Petersburg, FL 33742**

Post Office Box 22332St. Petersburg, FL 33742

**Tampa Bay Community Reinvestment Corporation
1111 N. Westshore Boulevard, Suite 103
Tampa, FL 33607**

1111 N. Westshore Boulevard, Suite 103Tampa, FL 33607

**GEORGIA (3) Mutual Federal Savings Bank
205 Auburn Avenue, NE
Atlanta, GA 30335-5301**

205 Auburn Avenue, NEAtlanta, GA 30335-5301

**Savannah Community Development Corporation
31 W. Congress Street
Suite 100
Savannah, GA 31401**

31 W. Congress StreetSuite 100Savannah, GA 31401

**Unified Singers Federal Credit Union
517 Campbell Street
Thomasville, GA 31799**

517 Campbell StreetThomasville, GA 31799

**ILLINOIS (17) ACCION Chicago
3811 West 26th Street
2nd Floor
Chicago, IL 60623**

3811 West 26th Street2nd FloorChicago, IL 60623

**Austin/West Garfield Federal Credit Union
4909 W. Division Street
Suite 100
Chicago, IL 60651**

4909 W. Division StreetSuite 100Chicago, IL 60651

**CANDO's Citywide Development Corporation
343 S. Dearborn Street
Suite 910
Chicago, IL 60604-3808**

343 S. Dearborn StreetSuite 910Chicago, IL 60604-3808

**Chicago Community Loan Fund
343 S. Dearborn, Suite 1001
Chicago, IL 60604**

343 S. Dearborn, Suite 1001Chicago, IL 60604

**Community Investment Corporation
222 S. Riverside Plaza
Suite 2200
Chicago, IL 60606**

222 S. Riverside PlazaSuite 2200Chicago, IL 60606

**Illinois Facilities Fund
300 West Adams Street
Chicago, IL 60606**

300 West Adams StreetChicago, IL 60606

**Israel Methcomm Federal Credit Union
7620 South Cottage Grove
Chicago, IL 60619**

7620 South Cottage GroveChicago, IL 60619

**National Community Investment Fund
1950 East 71st Street
Chicago, IL 60649-2096**

1950 East 71st StreetChicago, IL 60649-2096

**National Equity Fund, Inc.
547 West Jackson Boulevard
Chicago, IL 60661**

547 West Jackson BoulevardChicago, IL 60661

**Neighborhood Housing Services of Chicago, Inc.
747 North May Street
Chicago, IL 60622**

Chicago, Inc.747 North May StreetChicago, IL 60622

**Nonprofit Financial Center
111 West Washington Street Suite 1221
Chicago, IL 60602**

111 West Washington Street Suite 1221Chicago, IL 60602

**NorthSide Community Federal Credit Union
4138 N. Sheridan Road
Chicago, IL 60613**

4138 N. Sheridan RoadChicago, IL 60613

**Partners for Community Investment
2929 South Wabash Avenue Suite 200
Chicago, IL 60616**

2929 South Wabash Avenue Suite 200Chicago, IL 60616

**Sable Bancshares, Inc.
1111 South Homan Avenue
Chicago, IL 60624**

1111 South Homan AvenueChicago, IL 60624

**The Shorebank Corporation
7054 South Jeffrey Boulevard
Chicago, IL 60649-2096**

7054 South Jeffrey BoulevardChicago, IL 60649-2096

**The South Shore Bank of Chicago
71 st & Jeffery Boulevard
Chicago, IL 60649-2096**

71 & Jeffery BoulevardChicago, IL 60649-2096

**Neighborhood and Family Investment Fund
16333 South Halsted
Harvey, IL 60426**

16333 South HalstedHarvey, IL 60426

**INDIANA (3) Eastside Community Fund, Inc.
26 North Arsenal Avenue
Indianapolis, IN 46201**

26 North Arsenal AvenueIndianapolis, IN 46201

**Indianapolis Neighborhood Housing Partnership
3550 North Washington Boulevard
Indianapolis, IN 46205-3719**

3550 North Washington BoulevardIndianapolis, IN 46205-3719

**Near Eastside Community Federal Credit Union
2230 East 10th Street
Indianapolis, IN 46201-2006**

2230 East 10th StreetIndianapolis, IN 46201-2006

**KANSAS (2) Douglass Bancorp, Inc.
1314 North 5th Street
Kansas City, KS 66101**

1314 North 5th StreetKansas City, KS 66101

**Communities United Credit Union
1755 North Hillside
Wichita, KS 67214**

1755 North HillsideWichita, KS 67214

**KENTUCKY (6) Central Appalachia Peoples Federal Credit Union
1835 Big Hill Road
P.O. Box 504
Berea, KY 40403**

Credit Union1835 Big Hill RoadP.O. Box 504Berea, KY 40403

**Federation of Appalachian Housing Enterprises
1835 Big Hill Road, Drawer B
Berea, KY 40403**

1835 Big Hill Road, Drawer BBerea, KY 40403

**Community Ventures Corporation
1450 North Broadway
Lexington, KY 40505**

1450 North BroadwayLexington, KY 40505

**Kentucky Highlands Investment Corporation
Post Office Box 1738
London, KY 40743-1738**

Post Office Box 1738London, KY 40743-1738

**Louisville Development Bancorp, Inc.
2901 West Broadway
Louisville, KY 40251**

2901 West BroadwayLouisville, KY 40251

**Mountain Economic Development Fund, Inc.
201 South Main Street
Winchester, KY 40391**

201 South Main StreetWinchester, KY 40391

**LOUISIANA (1) Gulf Coast Business and Industrial Development Corporation
8752 Quarters Lake Road
Baton Rouge, LA 70809**

8752 Quarters Lake RoadBaton Rouge, LA 70809

**MAINE (1) Coastal Enterprises, Inc.
Water Street
Post Office Box 268
Wiscasset, ME 04578**

Water StreetPost Office Box 268Wiscasset, ME 04578

**MARYLAND (5) Baltimore Regional Community Development Corporation
601 N. Howard Street
Baltimore, MD 21201**

601 N. Howard StreetBaltimore, MD 21201

**Development Credit Fund, Inc.
2530 N. Charles Street
Suite 200
Baltimore, MD 21218**

2530 N. Charles StreetSuite 200Baltimore, MD 21218

**Enterprise Social Investment Corporation
10227 Wincopin Circle
Columbia, MD 21044**

10227 Wincopin CircleColumbia, MD 21044

**The Enterprise Foundation
10227 Wincopin Circle
Columbia, MD 21044**

10227 Wincopin CircleColumbia, MD 21044

**McAuley Institute
8300 Colesville Road
Suite 310
Silver Spring, MD 20910**

8300 Colesville RoadSuite 310Silver Spring, MD 20910

**MASSACHUSETTS (8) Boston Bank of Commerce
133 Federal Street
Boston, MA 02110**

133 Federal StreetBoston, MA 02110

**Working Capital
99 Bishop Allen Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139**

99 Bishop Allen DriveCambridge, MA 02139

**Jobs for Fall River, Inc.
One Government Center
Fall River, MA 02722**

One Government CenterFall River, MA 02722

**Western Massachusetts Enterprise Fund
308 Main Street, Suite 2-B
Greenfield, MA 01301**

308 Main Street, Suite 2-BGreenfield, MA 01301

**Boston Community Capital (formerly BCLF, Inc.)
30 Germania Street
Jamaica Plain, MA 02130**

(formerly BCLF, Inc.)30 Germania StreetJamaica Plain, MA 02130

**Boston Community Loan Fund, Inc.
30 Germania Street
Jamaica Plain, MA 02130**

30 Germania StreetJamaica Plain, MA 02130

**D. Edward Wells Federal Credit Union
864 State Street
Springfield, MA 01109**

864 State StreetSpringfield, MA 01109

**Institute for Community Economics
57 School Street
Springfield, MA 01105-1331**

57 School StreetSpringfield, MA 01105-1331

**MICHIGAN (3) Neighborhoods, Inc. of Battle Creek
47 North Washington Avenue
Battle Creek, MI 49017**

47 North Washington AvenueBattle Creek, MI 49017

**Community Capital Development Corporation
711 North Saginaw Street Suite 123
Flint, MI 48503**

711 North Saginaw Street Suite 123Flint, MI 48503

**Michigan Housing Trust Fund
5829 Executive Drive
Lansing, MI 48911**

5829 Executive DriveLansing, MI 48911

**MINNESOTA (9) Anoka County Capital Fund
299 Coon Rapids Boulevard, Suite 12
Coon Rapids, MN 55433**

299 Coon Rapids Boulevard, Suite 12Coon Rapids, MN 55433

**Northeast Ventures Corporation
802 Alworth Building
302 West Superior Street
Duluth, MN 55802**

802 Alworth Building302 West Superior StreetDuluth, MN 55802

**Northland Foundation
Providence Building
332 West Superior Street
Suite 600
Duluth, MN 55802**

Providence Building332 West Superior StreetSuite 600Duluth, MN 55802

**Central Minnesota Initiative Fund
70 Southeast First Avenue
Little Falls, MN 56345**

70 Southeast First AvenueLittle Falls, MN 56345

**Minneapolis Consortium of Community Developers
1808 Riverside Avenue
Suite 206
Minneapolis, MN 55454**

1808 Riverside AvenueSuite 206Minneapolis, MN 55454

**Northcountry Cooperative Development Fund
1219 University Avenue, SE
Minneapolis, MN 55414**

1219 University Avenue, SEMinneapolis, MN 55414

**Southside Neighborhood Housing Services of Minneapolis, Inc.
3137 Chicago Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55407**

3137 Chicago Avenue SouthMinneapolis, MN 55407

**Wendell Phillips Community Development Federal Credit Union
1014 East Franklin Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55404**

1014 East Franklin Avenue SouthMinneapolis, MN 55404

**Northeast Entrepreneur Fund, Inc.
Olcott Plaza
820 Ninth Street North
Suite 140
Virginia, MN 55792**

Olcott Plaza820 Ninth Street NorthSuite 140Virginia, MN 55792

**MISSISSIPPI (5) Delta Foundation, Inc.
819 Main Street
Greenville, MS 38707**

819 Main StreetGreenville, MS 38707

**Enterprise Corporation of the Delta
308 East Pearl Street
4th Floor
Jackson, MS 39201**

308 East Pearl Street4th FloorJackson, MS 39201

**Jackson/Hinds Minority Capital Fund, Inc.
207 W. Amite Street, Suite 401
Jackson, MS 39201**

207 W. Amite Street, Suite 401Jackson, MS 39201

**Quitman County Federal Credit Union
201 Humphrey Street
Post Office Box 277
Marks, MS 38646**

201 Humphrey StreetPost Office Box 277Marks, MS 38646

**East Mississippi Development Corporation
910 Highway 19 North
Meridian, MS 39307**

910 Highway 19 NorthMeridian, MS 39307

**MISSOURI (1) Rehabilitation Loan Corporation
6285 Paseo Boulevard
Kansas City, MO 64110**

6285 Paseo BoulevardKansas City, MO 64110

**MONTANA (1) Montana Community Development Corporation
(formerly Montana Western Region Economic Development Group)
127 North Higgins Avenue, Suite 301
Missoula, MT 59802**

(formerly Montana Western Region Economic Development Group)127 North Higgins Avenue, Suite 301Missoula, MT 59802

**NEBRASKA (1) Omaha 100, Incorporated
2424 Cuming Street
Omaha, NE 68131-1600**

2424 Cuming StreetOmaha, NE 68131-1600

**NEW HAMP SMSHIRE New Hampshire Community Loan Fund, Inc.
79 South State Street
Post Office Box 800
Concord, NH 03302-0800**

79 South State StreetPost Office Box 800Concord, NH 03302-0800

**NEW JERSEY (5) Camden Community Credit Union
423 Market Street
Camden, NJ 08102**

423 Market StreetCamden, NJ 08102

**Cooperative Business Assistance Corporation
433 Market Street, Suite 201
Camden, NJ 08102**

433 Market Street, Suite 201Camden, NJ 08102

**New Community Development Loan Corporation
233 West Market Street
Newark, NJ 07103**

233 West Market StreetNewark, NJ 07103

**New Community Federal Credit Union
233 West Market Street
Newark, NJ 07103**

233 West Market StreetNewark, NJ 07103

**New Jersey Community Loan Fund
One West State Street
Post Office Box 1655
Trenton, NJ 08607**

One West State StreetPost Office Box 1655Trenton, NJ 08607

**NEW MEXICO (2) ACCION New Mexico
320 Gold Street Southwest, Suite 400
Albuquerque, NM 87102**

320 Gold Street Southwest, Suite 400Albuquerque, NM 87102

**New Mexico Community Development Loan Fund
Post Office Box 705
Albuquerque, NM 87103**

Post Office Box 705Albuquerque, NM 87103

**NEW YORK (30) Capital District Community Loan Fund
340 First Street
Albany, NY 12206**

340 First StreetAlbany, NY 12206

**BHA Residents Community Development Federal Credit Union
35 Exchange Street
Post Office Box 1906
Binghamton, NY 13902**

35 Exchange StreetPost Office Box 1906Binghamton, NY 13902

**Bethex Federal Credit Union
20 East 179th Street, Basement
Bronx, NY 10453**

20 East 179th Street, BasementBronx, NY 10453

**Credit Incorporated
370 East 149th Street
Bronx, NY 10455**

370 East 149th StreetBronx, NY 10455

**ACCION New York
235 Havemeyer Street
2 nd Floor
Brooklyn, NY 11211**

235 Havemeyer Street2 FloorBrooklyn, NY 11211

**Brooklyn Ecumenical Federal Credit Union
541 Atlantic Avenue
Brooklyn, NY 11217**

541 Atlantic AvenueBrooklyn, NY 11217

**Central Brooklyn Federal Credit Union
1205 Fulton Street
Brooklyn, NY 11216**

1205 Fulton StreetBrooklyn, NY 11216

**Community Capital Bank
111 Livingston Street
Brooklyn, NY 11201**

111 Livingston StreetBrooklyn, NY 11201

**North/East Brooklyn Community Capital Corporation
116 Williams Avenue
Brooklyn, NY 11207**

116 Williams AvenueBrooklyn, NY 11207

**Alternatives Federal Credit Union
301 West State Street
Ithaca, NY 14850**

301 West State StreetIthaca, NY 14850

**Greater Jamaica Local Development Company, Inc.
90-04 161st Street
Jamaica, NY 11432**

90-04 161st StreetJamaica, NY 11432

**Central Harlem Local Development Corporation
131 West 138 th Street
New York, NY 10030**

131 West 138 StreetNew York, NY 10030

**Corporation for Supportive Housing
342 Madison Avenue
Suite 505
New York, NY 10173**

342 Madison AvenueSuite 505New York, NY 10173

**Grow America Fund, Inc.
317 Madison Avenue
Suite 1500
New York, NY 10017**

317 Madison AvenueSuite 1500New York, NY 10017

**Homesteaders Federal Credit Union
40 Prince Street
New York, NY 10012**

40 Prince StreetNew York, NY 10012

**Local Initiatives Support Corporation
733 Third Avenue
New York, NY 10017**

733 Third AvenueNew York, NY 10017

**Lower East Side People's Federal Credit Union
37 Avenue B
New York, NY 10009**

37 Avenue BNew York, NY 10009

**National Federation of Community Development Credit Unions
120 Wall Street, 10th Floor
New York, NY 10005-3902**

120 Wall Street, 10th FloorNew York, NY 10005-3902

**Neighborhood Housing Services of New York City, Inc.
121 West 27 th Street, 4 th Floor
New York, NY 10001**

121 West 27 Street, 4 FloorNew York, NY 10001

**Neighborhood Trust Federal Credit Union
656 West 181 st Street
Suite 1A
New York, NY 10033**

656 West 181 StreetSuite 1ANew York, NY 10033

**Nonprofit Facilities Fund
70 W. 36th Street - 11th Floor
New York, NY 10018-8007**

70 W. 36th Street - 11th FloorNew York, NY 10018-8007

**Renaissance Economic Development Corporation
180 Eldridge Street
New York, NY 10002**

180 Eldridge StreetNew York, NY 10002

**Seedco
915 Broadway, Suite 1703
New York, NY 10010**

915 Broadway, Suite 1703New York, NY 10010

**The Parodneck Foundation, Inc.
121 Sixth Avenue, Suite 501
New York, NY 10013**

121 Sixth Avenue, Suite 501New York, NY 10013

**Union Settlement Federal Credit Union
237 East 104th Street
New York, NY 10029**

237 East 104th StreetNew York, NY 10029

**Washington Heights and Inwood Development Corporation
57 Wadsworth Avenue
New York, NY 10033**

57 Wadsworth AvenueNew York, NY 10033

**Women's Venture Fund, Inc.
34 East 70 Street
New York, NY 10021**

34 East 70 StreetNew York, NY 10021

**Adirondack Economic Development Corporation
Trudeau Road
Post Office Box 747
Saranac Lake, NY 12983**

Trudeau RoadPost Office Box 747Saranac Lake, NY 12983

**Syracuse Neighborhood Housing Services, Inc.
1723 South Salina Street
Syracuse, NY 13205**

1723 South Salina StreetSyracuse, NY 13205

**Leviticus 25:23 Alternative Fund, Inc.
928 McLean Avenue
Yonkers, NY 10704-4103**

928 McLean AvenueYonkers, NY 10704-4103

**NORTH CAROLINA (11) Tri County Credit Union
Post Office Box 754
Ahoski, NC 27910**

Post Office Box 754Ahoski, NC 27910

**School Workers Federal Credit Union
431 Beatties Ford Road
Post Office Box 16285
Charlotte, NC 28297**

431 Beatties Ford RoadPost Office Box 16285Charlotte, NC 28297

**Self-Help Credit Union
301 West Main Street
Durham, NC 27702-3619**

301 West Main StreetDurham, NC 27702-3619

**Self-Help Ventures Fund
301 West Main Street
Durham, NC 27702-3619**

301 West Main StreetDurham, NC 27702-3619

**Chowan Credit Union
Post Office Box 627
Edenton, NC 27932**

Post Office Box 627Edenton, NC 27932

**College Heights Credit Union
1503 Murchison Road
Fayetteville, NC 28301**

1503 Murchison RoadFayetteville, NC 28301

**Gateway Community Development Credit Union
314 S. Garnett Street
Henderson, NC 27536**

314 S. Garnett StreetHenderson, NC 27536

**Rowan-Iredell Area Credit Union
1300 W. Bank Street
Salisbury, NC 28144**

1300 W. Bank StreetSalisbury, NC 28144

**St. Luke Credit Union
302 Granville Street
Post Office Box 548
Windsor, NC 27983**

302 Granville StreetPost Office Box 548Windsor, NC 27983

**Micro-Enterprise Loan Program of Winston-Salem Forsyth County, Inc.
1001 S. Marshall Street
Suite 32
Winston-Salem, NC 27101**

1001 S. Marshall StreetSuite 32Winston-Salem, NC 27101

**Victory-Masonic Mutual Credit Union
1225 E. Fifth Street
Winston-Salem, NC 27102-0232**

1225 E. Fifth StreetWinston-Salem, NC 27102-0232

**OHIO (7) Enterprise Community Fund
550 South Arlington Street
Akron, OH 44306**

550 South Arlington StreetAkron, OH 44306

**Appalachian Development Federal Credit Union
900 East State Street, Suite 101
Athens, OH 45701**

900 East State Street, Suite 101Athens, OH 45701

**Faith Community United Credit Union, Inc.
3550 E. 93rd Street
Cleveland, OH 441051644**

3550 E. 93rd StreetCleveland, OH 441051644

**ShoreBank, Cleveland
540 East 105 th Street
Cleveland, OH 44108**

540 East 105 StreetCleveland, OH 44108

**The Columbus Growth Fund, Inc.
941 Chatham Lane
Suite 207
Columbus, OH 43221**

941 Chatham LaneSuite 207Columbus, OH 43221

**Enterprise Development Corporation
9030 Hocking Hills Drive
The Plains, OH 45780**

9030 Hocking Hills DriveThe Plains, OH 45780

**Toledo Urban Federal Credit Union
Post Office Box 351295
Toledo, OH 43635**

Post Office Box 351295Toledo, OH 43635

**OKLAHOMA (3) Rural Enterprises, Inc.
Post Office Box 1335
Durant, OK 74702**

Post Office Box 1335Durant, OK 74702

**Neighborhood Housing Services of Oklahoma City, Inc.
2915 N. Classen Boulevard, Suite 320
Post Office Box 60327
Oklahoma City, OK 73146-0327**

2915 N. Classen Boulevard, Suite 320Post Office Box 60327Oklahoma City, OK 73146-0327

**Tulsa Economic Development Corporation
907 South Detroit, Suite 1001
Sun Oil Building
Tulsa, OK 74120**

907 South Detroit, Suite 1001Sun Oil BuildingTulsa, OK 74120

**OREGON (1) Albina Community Bancorp
1130 N.E. Alberta
Portland, OR 97211**

1130 N.E. AlbertaPortland, OR 97211

**PENNSYLVANIA (7) Aliquippa Regional Credit Union
392 Franklin Avenue
Aliquippa, PA 15001**

392 Franklin AvenueAliquippa, PA 15001

**Delaware Valley Community Reinvestment Fund, Inc.
924 Cherry Street
Philadelphia, PA 191072405**

924 Cherry StreetPhiladelphia, PA 191072405

**National Community Capital Association (formerly National Association of Community Development Loan Funds)
924 Cherry Street
Philadelphia, PA 19107**

(formerly National Association of Community Development Loan Funds)924 Cherry StreetPhiladelphia, PA 19107

**Philadelphia Neighborhood Housing Services, Inc.
511 N. Broad Street - 4th Floor
Philadelphia, PA 19123**

511 N. Broad Street - 4th FloorPhiladelphia, PA 19123

**United Bank of Philadelphia
714 Market Street
Philadelphia, PA 19106**

714 Market StreetPhiladelphia, PA 19106

**Community Loan Fund of Southwestern Pennsylvania, Inc.
48 South 14th Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15203**

48 South 14th StreetPittsburgh, PA 15203

**Washington County Council on Economic Development
703 Couthouse Square
Washington, PA 15301**

703 Couthouse SquareWashington, PA 15301

**PUERTO RICO (1) Corporacion Para El Desarrollo Econqmico, Urbano Y Vivienda E Industrial De Catano, Inc.
Post Office Box 630577
Catano, PR 00963**

Post Office Box 630577Catano, PR 00963

**SOUTH DAKOTA (1) Northeast South Dakota Energy Conservation Corporation
414 Third Avenue East
Sisseton, SD 57262-1598**

Corporation414 Third Avenue EastSisseton, SD 57262-1598

**TENNESSEE (1) Chattanooga Neighborhood Enterprise
535 Chestnut Street, Suite 100
Chattanooga, TN 37402-4098**

535 Chestnut Street, Suite 100Chattanooga, TN 37402-4098

**TEXAS (10) East Austin Community Federal Credit Union
1704 East 12th Street
Austin, TX 78702**

1704 East 12th StreetAustin, TX 78702

**Greater Brownsville Community Development Corporation
1150 E. Adams - Second Floor
Brownsville, TX 78520**

1150 E. Adams - Second FloorBrownsville, TX 78520

**Neighborhood Housing Services of Dimmit County, Inc.
301 Pena Street
Carrizo Springs, TX 78834**

301 Pena StreetCarrizo Springs, TX 78834

**Southern Dallas Development Corporation
1402 Corinth Street
Suite 1150, LB135
Dallas, TX 75215**

1402 Corinth StreetSuite 1150, LB135Dallas, TX 75215

**ACCION El Paso
7744 North Loop Road
El Paso, TX 79915**

7744 North Loop RoadEl Paso, TX 79915

**Greater Houston Small Business Equity Fund, Inc.
401 Studewoord, Suite 200
Houston, TX 77007**

401 Studewoord, Suite 200Houston, TX 77007

**ACCION Texas, Inc.
109 N. San Saba
San Antonio, TX 78205**

109 N. San SabaSan Antonio, TX 78205

**Rural Development and Finance Corporation
(formerly National Rural Development and Finance Corporation)
711 Navarro Street, Suite 350
San Antonio, TX 78205-1721**

711 Navarro Street, Suite 350San Antonio, TX 78205-1721

**San Antonio Business Development Fund, Inc.
4011 San Pedro, Suite 201
San Antonio, TX 78212**

4011 San Pedro, Suite 201San Antonio, TX 78212

**Weslaco Catholic Federal Credit Union
302 W. Llano Grande
Weslaco, TX 78596**

302 W. Llano GrandeWeslaco, TX 78596

**UTAH (1) Salt Lake Neighborhood Housing Services
622 West 500 North
Salt Lake City, UT 84116**

622 West 500 NorthSalt Lake City, UT 84116

**VIRGINIA (3) Ethiopian Community Development Council, Inc.
1038 South Highland Street
Arlington, VA 22204**

1038 South Highland StreetArlington, VA 22204

**Richmond Neighborhood Housing Services, Inc.
128 West Brookland Park Boulevard
Richmond, VA 23222**

128 West Brookland Park BoulevardRichmond, VA 23222

**Virginia Community Development Loan Fund
1624 Hull Street
Richmond, VA 23224**

1624 Hull StreetRichmond, VA 23224

**VERMONT (2) Vermont Development Credit Union
95 North Avenue
Burlington, VT 05401**

95 North AvenueBurlington, VT 05401

**Vermont Community Loan Fund, Inc.
7 Court Street (05602)
Post Office Box 827
Montpelier, VT 05601**

7 Court Street (05602)Post Office Box 827Montpelier, VT 05601

**WASHINGTON (1) Cascadia Revolving Fund
119 First Avenue South
Suite 100
Seattle, WA 98104**

119 First Avenue SouthSuite 100Seattle, WA 98104

**WISCONSIN (2) Martin Luther King Economic Development Corporation
2821 North 4th Street
Suite 208
Milwaukee, WI 53212**

2821 North 4th StreetSuite 208Milwaukee, WI 53212

**Racine Development Group
4701 Washington Avenue, Suite 215
Racine, WI 53406**

4701 Washington Avenue, Suite 215Racine, WI 53406

**Appendix C
Glossary of Budget and
Accounting Terms and Definitions **

Glossary of Budget andAccounting Terms and Definitions
 

Accounts Payable

*The amount owed by the reporting entity for goods and services received.*

* *

Appropriations

*Authority given to Federal agencies to incur obligations and to make payments from Treasury for specified purposes.*

* *

Authorization(Authorizing Legislation)

*An Act of Congress that establishes or continues a federal program or agency either for a specified period of time or indefinitely; specifies its general goals and conduct; and usually sets a ceiling on the amount of budget authority that can be provided in an annual appropriation. An authorization for an agency or program usually is required before an appropriation for the same agency or program can be passed.*

* *

Carryover

*The unobligated amounts at the end of a fiscal year for unexpired accounts.*

* *

Contingencies

*An existing condition, situation, or set of circumstances which poses the possibility of a loss to an agency that will ultimately be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur.*

*Assets*

*Assets which the reporting entity has authority to use in its operations. Management has the authority to decide how funds are used, or management is legally obligated to use funds to meet entity operations, e.g., repay loans from the Treasury.*

Expended Appropriation

*The amount of expenditures (outlays) during the current fiscal year net of refunds to the appropriation made from general funds, specific funds, and trust funds.*

* *

Expenditure

*Value of goods and services ordered and obligated which have been received.*

* *

Expense

*The outflow of assets or incurrence of liabilities (or both) during a period as a result of rendering services, delivering or producing goods, or carrying out other normal operating activities.*

* *

Fiscal Year

*Any yearly accounting period, regardless of its relationship to a calendar year. The fiscal year for the Federal Government begins October 1 and ends on September 30.*

* *

Governmental Assets

*Assets that arise from transactions of the Federal Government or an entity of the federal government with nonfederal entities. The term "nonfederal entities" encompasses domestic and foreign persons and organizations outside the U. S. Government.*

* *

Governmental Liabilities

*These liabilities are claims against the entity by non-federal entities.*

* *

Intragovernmental Liabilities

*These liabilities are claims against the entity by other federal entities.*

Obligated Balance

*The amount of obligations already incurred for which payment has not yet been made. This balance can be carried forward indefinitely until the obligations are paid.*

* *

Obligation

*Spending commitment made by the Federal Government that will require an outlay either immediately or in the future.*

* *

Obligational Authority

*The sum of (1) budget authority provided for a given fiscal year, (2) unobligated balances of amounts brought forward from prior years, (3) amounts of offsetting collections to be credited to specific funds or accounts during that year, and (4) transfers between funds or accounts.*

* *

Outlays

*The issuance of checks, disbursement of cash, or electronic transfer of funds made to liquidate a federal obligation.*

Performance Measures

*An entity’s program and financial results expressed in terms of objective relative measures that disclose the extent to which its programs are achieving their intended objectives. Financial measures summarize results in a manner that illustrate significant indicators of financial operations for a specified reporting period and changes in financial conditions during that period.*

* *

Statements of Federal

Financial Accounting

Concepts (SFFAC) and

Standards (SFFAS)

 

*Provides the financial concepts and the recognition and measurement requirements to follow when preparing the principal statements.*

* *

Transfers in

*An intragovernmental transfer of cash or other capitalized assets without reimbursement.*

* *

Transfers out

*An intragovernmental transfer of cash or of other capitalized assets without reimbursement.*

* *

U.S. Government

Standard General Ledger

*Provides a uniform chart of accounts to be used to standardize Federal agency accounting and to support the preparation of standard external reports.*

* *

Undelivered Orders

*The value of goods and services ordered and obligated which have not been received.*

* *

Unexpended Appropriation

*The amount of budget authority unspent and still available for conversion into outlays in the future; the sum of the obligated and unobligated balance.*

* *

Unobligated Balance

*The portion of budget authority that has not yet been obligated. In one-year accounts the unobligated balance expires (ceases to be available for obligation) at the end of the fiscal year. In multiple-year accounts, the unobligated balance may be carried forward and the unobligated balance is carried forward indefinitely until specifically rescinded by law or until the purposes for which it was provided have been accomplished.*

* *

**CDFI Fund Management Officials**Director Ellen Lazar

Deputy Director for Management/CFO Paul Gentille

Deputy Director for Policy and Programs Maurice Jones

**Advisory Board Members
(During Fiscal Year 1997) John A. Litzenberg, Chair
Charles Stewart Mott Foundation Frank T. Ballesteros
PPEP Microbusiness, Housing & Development Corporation, Inc. Arthur C. Campbell
Department of Agriculture Richard S. Carnell
Department of the Treasury Ada E. Deer
Department of the Interior Connie E. Evans
Women’s Self-Employment Project Patricia Forbes
Small Business Administration Jacqueline L. Johnson
Tlingit-Haida Regional Housing Authority Clara G. Miller
National Association of Community Development Loan Funds Larry Parks
Commerce Department Carol J. Parry
Chemical Bank Nicolas P. Retsinas
Department of Housing and
Urban Development George P. Surgeon
Shorebank Corporation John E. Taylor
National Community Reinvestment Coalition **
