---
title: TREASURY DEPARTMENT KIOSKS BRING CAREER INFORMATION TO COLLEGE CAMPUSES
date: 1998-06-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2526
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Treasury Department is sending this week 20 touch-screen computer kiosks to five Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and 15 members of the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities (HACU). The kiosks provide up-to-date information on nationwide employment and internship opportunities in the federal sector and at the Treasury Department.



In today's growing economy, it is more important than ever for employers in the public and private sectors to hire and retain the best people they can, Secretary Robert E. Rubin said. By connecting us to a greater range of people, this new initiative will both make Treasury stronger and make more young people aware of these opportunities.



The five HBCUs receiving touch-screen kiosks are: Howard University; Jackson State University (Jackson, MS); North Carolina Central University; Morris Brown College (Atlanta, GA); and, Southern University and A&M College (Baton Rouge, LA). The members of HACU receiving kiosks include: Miami-Dade Community College (Wolfson and Kendall Campuses); University of Miami at Coral Gables; California State University, Fresno; University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA); John Jay College of Criminal Justice (New York); City College, City University of New York; Metropolitan State College of Denver; Universidad Intermericana de Puerto Rico (Metropolitan Campus, Rio Piedras); Pontifical Catholic University of Puerto Rico (Ponce); American University of Puerto Rico (Bayam¢n and Manat¡ Campuses); University of Illinois at Chicago; Laredo Community College (Texas); and, Texas A&M University (Laredo). The majority of these universities have at least 25 percent Hispanic enrollment.



This program was designed to provide employment information to students who do not have access to computers or the Internet. The information in the kiosks is updated daily through dedicated telephone lines by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), and students can access and print all necessary forms and announcements from the terminals. In 1997, OPM purchased twelve touch-screen computer kiosks and placed them in six institutions with a high enrollment of Hispanic students and six HBCUs.



These kiosks will provide a direct link between the Treasury Department and these schools, said Nancy Killefer, Assistant Secretary for Management and Chief Financial Officer for the Treasury Department. We can't be everywhere, but technology can certainly get us to more places.
