---
title: rr3178
date: 1998-05-27
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr3178
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

May 27, 1999
RR-3178

**TREASURY UNDER SECRETARY (ENFORCEMENT) JAMES E. JOHNSON**Thank you Mr. Chairman, Representative Scott, and members of the Subcommittee. It is a privilege to join the Deputy Attorney General as we review the issue of firearms violence and legislative proposals that will enhance our ability to reduce it.

Today is a time to mark real progress and innovations in reducing the harm to communities caused by gun violence. It is also a harrowing time as we continue to witness violence in our streets and our schools. The violence that still takes place in many cities -- and in some of our schools -- has shown that we still have a long way to go. We simply must redouble our efforts to stop the misuse of firearms.

We've learned how to do this. Both enforcement and prevention strategies are vitally important to making our communities safer. Within this larger context, there are a series of other issues on which Americans agree: firearms and explosives should*not*be available to certain people -- not to felons, not to violent criminals, and not to unsupervised juveniles. Firearms and explosives must be bought and sold legally and responsibly. And finally, firearms must be stored safely and securely by their owners, in order to better prevent violent crime and access to guns by troubled youth and vulnerable children.

This consensus has greatly expanded in recent weeks. It is reflected by last week Senate votes. It is also reflected in the support expressed by Congressional leaders and important segments of the firearms industry. The consensus provides ample room for agreement on sensible legislation, and we thank the Chairmen and ranking members for holding this hearing to advance our discussion of this critical issue.

Our joint statement covers these areas in greater detail. I will briefly highlight a few.

As Treasury Under Secretary, my primary focus with regard to reducing violent crime is the development and implementation of the firearms enforcement mission of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, which is the principal federal agency enforcing the nation firearms laws. ATF has the jurisdiction, expertise, and experience necessary to successfully investigate armed criminals and gun trafficking crimes. Under the leadership of Director Magaw, the dedicated men and women of ATF are providing essential and innovative contributions to the fight against violent crime.

One of ATF greatest achievements is its partnership with state and local authorities. As the Deputy Attorney General has noted, such a partnership, which includes U.S. Attorneys and state prosecutors, has helped increase the overall number of prosecutions for gun violations over the last six years. Notable examples of this work, of course, include Richmond Project Exile and Boston Operation Ceasefire, both of which relied in part on the work of the ATF.

We can greatly assist the men and women in law enforcement if we provide them with tools they need to attack the illegal market in firearms that supplies criminals and juveniles who cannot legally buy guns from licensed dealers. To build on the success of the Brady law, we must do more to stop the criminal behind the criminal -- the illegal gun trafficker. Let me give you one example of the kind of trafficking I'm talking about and what ATF can do.

- In Philadelphia, during 1994 and 1995, a straw purchaser and a trafficker conspired to buy over 50 semiautomatic rifles, boxes of high powered ammunition, and accessories such as one hundred round drum magazines, high powered scopes and laser sights. Seven rifles some connected to drug activity -- were subsequently recovered by law enforcement, and one was linked to homicides. ATF traced the majority of the recovered firearms to the straw purchaser, who had given them to a convicted felon. Together the straw purchaser and the felon sold AK-47 type rifles to persons suspected of being local drug traffickers. They sold at least one of the guns to a juvenile. The U.S. Attorney Office in Philadelphia secured a conviction of the defendants on all counts, including firearms trafficking and possession of a firearm in a school zone.

Mr. Chairman, the Youth Gun Crime Enforcement Act of 1999, H.R. 1768, contains critical new tools for attacking the illegal gun market. It will close the gun show loophole by requiring background checks and tracing records for all gun show sales. It would restrict handgun transfers to one a month. It will require licensed dealers to assist law enforcement to trace used as well as new crime guns. It will increase the penalties on illegal gun traffickers and make it easier to prosecute straw purchasers. It will also double the size of ATF Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative launched by President Clinton in July 1996.

This program targets gun violations involving youth and juveniles. It assists local law enforcement in tracing all recovered crime guns, and identifying and arresting illegal gun traffickers and criminal users of firearms. Mr. Chairman, we are grateful for the strong support that Congress is providing to this and ATF other firearms enforcement programs.

Adoption of these common sense measures will help law enforcement to keep guns out of the hands of criminals and unsupervised juveniles. We must do more. Eighteen and 19 year olds are a high crime age group. Indeed, ATF traces more crime guns recovered from 18 and 19 year olds than any other age group. It makes sense, therefore, to set reasonable limits on gun possession by young people. We must raise the age of eligibility to possess a handgun from 18 to 21, and prohibit those under 21 from possessing assault rifles or large capacity ammunition feeding devices.

We must also take steps to protect younger children. We should require that gun safety locks or storage devices be sold with firearms, and hold adults accountable for reckless storage resulting in a child causing death or serious bodily injury with a firearm.

Mr. Chairman, over the years I have worked closely with an undercover officer shot by drug dealers, and I have spoken to parents whose children fell victim to inner-city gun violence, recently, I visited Columbine High School and saw how a vibrant school was stopped cold by two murderers who should have never had bombs and never had guns. All victims of violent crime, and everyone threatened by it, ask all of us to do all we can to prevent more loss. We are requesting more agents and continuing to develop strategies to enhance our enforcement efforts. We ask you to support law enforcement and help make our children safer: We urge you to pass HR 1768.
