---
title: SECRETARY RUBIN NAMES CEOs PARTICIPATING IN BUSINESSLINC
date: 1998-09-15
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2682
---

Secretary Robert E. Rubin announced Tuesday the names of seven CEOs who will participate in the BusinessLINC initiative.



The group includes: Walter V. Shipley, Chairman & CEO, The Chase Manhattan Corporation; John E. Smith, Jr., Chairman, CEO & President, General Motors Corporation; Gary C. Wendt, Chairman & CEO, GE Capital Corporation; Jack M. Greenberg, President & CEO, McDonald's Corporation; J. Robert Beyster, Chairman, CEO & President, Science Applications Information Corporation; Carlton Guthrie, CEO, Trumark Metal Stamping; Diva Garza, President of ITC Personnel Services. The group's members are leaders in the field of promoting small business development.



BusinessLINC is one component of Vice President Gore's year-long effort to spotlight the importance of business investment in cities and distressed areas. BusinessLINC focuses on encouraging the linkage of large businesses to locally-owned small businesses in distressed areas to increase their economic competitiveness. Examples of these programs include one-on-one technical assistance, boards of advisors, classroom business training, and supplier development programs. These programs benefit small firms by providing technical assistance, improved market and financial access, expansion opportunities and procurement opportunities.



As part of its initiative, BusinessLINC has hosted five regional meetings across the country focusing on different business-to-business strategies. Representatives from small and large businesses as well as community members were invited to gather and share information about their programs.



Following the final meeting, scheduled for September 18, 1998, in Atlanta, Ga., a report will be compiled and then reviewed by the CEOs listed above. The report will profile successful programs, highlight the key principles of success and explore how to expand private-sector activity in these areas. The report will be presented to Vice President Gore at a roundtable later this year with Secretary Rubin and Administrator Aida Alvarez of the Small Business Administration.
