---
title: 'DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR INTERNATIONAL TAX AFFAIRS JOSEPH H. GUTTENTAG OECD BUSINESS/GOVERNMENT DIALOGUE ON TAXATION AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE "USING TECHNOLOGY TO IMPROVE TAXPAYER SERVICE TODAY AND TOMORROW" OTTAWA, CANADA - ELECTRONIC COMMERCE AND "'
date: 1998-10-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2751
---
*(Archived Content)*

Thank you for the opportunity to discuss with you the important issue of the characterization of income derived from electronic commerce. I would also like to bring you current as to what the OECD and the U.S. have done and are doing with respect to software transfers. I present this work also as an example of how we can proceed on many other issues we face. As I hope becomes apparent during the discussion, this issue of characterization must be resolved not only within each taxing jurisdiction but also between each taxing jurisdiction, and thus is an issue that the OECD should play a major role in resolving.

Background

A little background. Today's technology permits text, images and sounds to be digitized, that is, converted into digital or numeric form. Any information that is capable of being digitized can be made available over the Internet or similar technologies. There already exists a substantial market for access to digital products, such as electronic magazines, news broadcasts, stock information, photographs, software, videos, and sound recordings. Today's technology also permits a myriad of services to be delivered over the Internet, from investment advice and stock trading to travel information and booking services.

As technology improves and as the telecommunications, cable and television industries converge, it can be expected that the market for digitized information and on-line services will increase dramatically, as will the tax issues that need to be addressed: Among those issues, characterization issues will be primary.

Characterization Issues

The ability to digitize data and provide it over the Internet, for a fee, presents issues under income characterization rules. For example, is the income from the provision of digitized information a royalty? Is it income from the sale of a good? Or is it income from the provision of services? Of course, characterization questions are raised as well in the context of more traditional transactions. However, such questions are made more difficult in the context of electronic commerce generally, and in the context of digitized information specifically, because of the varying uses to which digital products can easily be put. For example, a photograph may previously have been made available to a consumer through the purchase of a physical copy of the photograph. The consumer may now purchase a digital copy of the photograph, downloaded from the Internet: Once the consumer has the digital copy, he may simply view an electronic image of the photograph on his computer screen, he may copy it onto a disk, incorporate it into another digital product or he may print out a physical copy on his printer. Payments for the rights to use the digital product in those different ways may be characterized differently for tax purposes. Again, such issues are raised in more traditional commerce: a purchaser of a physical copy of a photograph may make photocopies or scan the purchased photo to produce a digital copy. However, the high-quality of downloaded information and the ease with which it can be put to varying uses increases the likelihood that consumers will put the information to varied uses and, more importantly, that vendors will include the rights to such use along with the provision of the digitized product.

General Principles

Our analysis of these electronic commerce characterization issues must be governed by those same principles that apply to characterization issues generally. To do otherwise would violate the principle of neutrality, which requires that economically similar transactions be taxed similarly. That principle is one of the bedrock principles agreed to in Electronic Commerce: Taxation Framework Conditions to be released at the Ministerial meeting later this week.

In general, the character for tax purposes of any payment depends on the nature of the transaction that gives rise to the payment. A payment might be characterized as a payment for the supply of goods, for the provision of services, or for the use of or the right to use an intangible, depending on the rights or property transferred. That very general principle should guide us in determining the characterization of payments in electronic commerce. Thus, for example, we should resist the temptation to settle on answers that represent oversimplifications and over-generalizations, such as, for example, the conclusion that the provision of digitized information is in all cases the provision of services and not the provision of goods or the right to use an intangible.

Solution Requirements

Any solution reached to these difficult issues should not impede the further development of electronic commerce.

Any solution must take into account the fact that strict, unbending application of the definition of royalties may lead to inappropriate results, whereby, for example, minor differences in the method of delivery may produce significantly different tax results.

Any solution must be neutral between forms of electronic commerce and between conventional commerce and electronic commerce.

And, perhaps most importantly, any solution reached must achieve international consensus. If the international community cannot reach consensus on classification issues, there is high likelihood of either double taxation or tax avoidance, which can both hamper growth of this exciting new method of commerce and in appropriately shrink national revenue. The global nature of electronic commerce necessitates that characterization issues be considered in a global, international context and it will be imperative to seek an internationally accepted view on characterization. Promoting consensus is the area in which the OECD has a comparative advantage over other institutions. Why? Because of:

  the combination of OECD member countries with the countries and organizations that are part of the OECD outreach program, which is exemplified by the attendance here today by all member countries and many non-member countries and other organizations;
  the commitment from both business and government to have their tax experts participate in the OECD;
  the OECD's reputation for success, earned through its work in such areas as harmful tax competition, bribery, transfer pricing and model tax treaties; and
  last, but not least, a highly skilled Secretariat.

Software

As a case study or example of the characterization issues and possible resolutions, let us consider the distribution of computer software. A software distributor, in addition to offering for sale shrink-wrapped physical software packages deliverable by mail or at a retail location, could electronically store software on servers accessible through its Web page. The stored software could, for the payment of an appropriate fee, be:

  downloaded for viewing;
  downloaded for the purposes of provisional use (a test drive) of the software by a consumer;
  downloaded for full use by the consumer;
  downloaded for the purpose of copying to other computers, for example, to other computers linked by in a local area network (LAN); or
  downloaded for the purpose of modification by the consumer;
  downloaded after consumer-directed modification by the distributor (customization);
  downloaded for copying for resale.

Downloading

Downloading of digitized information to a consumer's computer generally involves the copying of material to the hard drive of the computer or a diskette or CD. In the case of downloaded computer software, the right to download will ordinarily be accompanied by a license to operate the program, subject to various restrictions.

In many respects, downloading digital products is simply another method of delivering goods. What the consumer is seeking to acquire is the content of the book or the photograph or the sound recording or the software. A consumer who creates a physical product from the electronic product that has been downloaded--a consumer who prints out a downloaded image, for example--is in much the same position as a consumer who purchased a physical copy of the image and took delivery by more traditional means. In the case of software, what the consumer generally seeks is not a physical product such as a diskette but the electronically coded set of instructions that can operate his computer as desired that is, the computer program. The purchaser likely will be indifferent as to the method of delivery of the purchased product.

Some take the view, therefore, that the characterization of the payments in the two cases physical delivery and downloading should not be affected simply because the method of delivery was different. That is the conclusion that both the OECD and the United States have reached with respect to computer programs.

Others, however, take the view that the difference in the method of delivery is relevant because in the case of the purchased downloaded digitized information there generally is also included the right to reproduce the digitized information, at least one time. In most jurisdictions, the copyright laws will protect digitized information in the same way as physical text, images or sound recordings, and thus the right to modify or reproduce the digitized information will vest exclusively in the copyright holder. It is therefore arguable that where the copyright holder permits others for a fee to exploit those exclusive rights, the payments should, at least in part, be regarded as payments for the right to use the copyright and thus as royalties for tax purposes.

A major challenge facing tax policy makers in relation to the transfer of digitized products will be to decide whether to take an economic equivalence approach that is, to characterize payments for downloaded information in the same manner as payments for information delivered by more traditional methods or whether to take account of the copyright use that might be inherent in downloading and characterize at least some portion of the payment as a royalty.

OECD Approach to the Characterization of Payments for Computer Software

The OECD has already begun the process of forming an international consensus on the issue of the characterization of payments for computer software. The revised Commentary to Article 12 of the Model Treaty released today provides that [t]he character of payments received in transaction involving the transfer of computer software depends on the nature of the rights that the transferee acquires under the particular arrangement regarding the use and exploitation of the program. The Commentary further provides that [t]he method of transferring the computer program to the transferee is not relevant. For example, it does not matter whether the transferee acquires a computer disk containing a copy of the program or directly receives a copy of the hard disk of her via a modem connection.

U.S. Approach to the Characterization of Payments for Computer Software

The United States as well has addressed the issue of the characterization of cross-border payments for computer software, including digitized computer software.

The regulations, which were issued last week, generally require that a transaction involving a computer program be treated as being within one of four possible categories:(i) transfer of copyright rights;(ii) transfer of a copyrighted article;(iii) provision of services;(iv) provision of know-how.

The rules of the regulations are based on the principle that functionally equivalent transactions should be treated similarly. In addition, the regulations provide that copyright law classifications should be a factor in classifying transactions for tax purposes but should not be determinative. For example, even if a shrink-wrap license were a valid license for copyright law purposes, we would treat the transaction as the sale of a good. Likewise, the determination of whether a transaction involving a newly developed or modified computer program is treated as the provision of services is to be based all the facts and circumstances of the transaction, including, but not limited to, the copyright law aspects of the transactions.

Future Work

As I've previously stated, it is imperative that we work on the classification issues I've been discussing not only within our respective countries but among our respective countries, within the OECD and in consultation with other international organizations and with business. The international aspects of this task can best be accomplished, I think, by addressing these classification issues within the context of the OECD Model Tax Convention. As you will note, this is an item on the post-Ottawa agenda. The OECD recognizes, as does the United States, that the principles underlying the treatment of software discussed above may be relevant is considering the treatment of electronic commerce transactions involving digitized content generally. Just as with respect to other taxation issues raised by electronic commerce, it is my firm belief that our current systems and principles are adequate to deal effectively with the characterization issues electronic commerce raises. It is important, however, that we agree on the application of those principles and systems and I thank you again for the opportunity to talk to you and, I hope, to further that process of agreement.
