---
title: DONALD V. HAMMOND APPOINTED FISCAL ASSISTANT SECRETARY
date: 1998-09-28
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/pr2716
---
*(Archived Content)*

    

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

PR2716



The Department of Treasury announced Monday the appointment of Donald V. Hammond as Fiscal Assistant Secretary.



Mr. Hammond, named Acting Fiscal Assistant Secretary on Jan. 5, was appointed as the Deputy Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the Treasury in July 1996. Prior to his appointment Mr. Hammond served as the Assistant Director of the Treasury's Government Securities Regulations Staff. In his work on the Government Securities Regulations Staff, Mr. Hammond focused on developing regulations for government securities broker-dealers and advised on issues impacting the government securities market.



As Fiscal Assistant Secretary, Mr. Hammond provides policy oversight over the activities of the Treasury's Financial Management Service and Bureau of the Public Debt. His position also serves as the Treasury's liaison with the Federal Reserve System in its capacity as the government's fiscal agent. His responsibilities include management of the government's cashflow, credit administration and the operation of the government-wide financial accounting and reporting systems. In addition, Mr. Hammond chairs the Treasury Working Group on Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT'99).



Mr. Hammond received a Masters Degree in Finance and Accounting from Northwestern University's J. L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management and graduated from Duke University with a Bachelor of Arts in Chemistry and Economics. He has been married for 15 years to Amy Lewis of Milwaukee. They and their two children live in Falls Church, Virginia. Mr. Hammond was raised in Northbrook, Illinois and is a lifelong Cubs fan.
