---
title: RUBIN NAMES BEP DIRECTOR AND DEPUTY DIRECTOR
date: 1998-12-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2845
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin Monday named Thomas A. Ferguson as the director of Treasury's Bureau of Engraving and Printing and Thomas C. Harris as the deputy director. The BEP produces all U.S. currency, government securities and more than half of the nation's postage stamps at two facilities in Washington, D.C., and Forth Worth, Texas.

As BEP director, Ferguson will work to position the bureau to meet the challenges of the next century and to assure the bureau's resources are appropriate to meet costumer agency demand. Harris, as deputy director, will manage day-to-day BEP operations and lead in policy development.

At BEP for more than 24 years, Ferguson has served as BEP deputy director since November 1997, and has been acting director since January 1998. He also served as BEP's associate director (management) and as the director of the bureau's Securities Technology Institute. During his tenure, the Securities Technology Institute directed the counterfeit deterrence program and the new currency design process. He chaired the New Currency Design Task Force which recommended the security features being incorporated in the new Series 1996 currency.

Ferguson received a B.A. in economics from Lafayette College, Easton, Pa., and a master's degree in public administration from the University of Southern California. He was born in Trenton, N.J. He, his wife and two daughters reside in Howard County, Md.

Thomas C. Harris has been Acting Associate Director for Operations, responsible for operations at both BEP printing facilities, since July 1998. He served as the plant manager of BEP's Western Currency Facility in Fort Worth from 1996-98. Previously, Harris was president and chief executive officer of his own consulting company in the security printing field. He also served as vice president of government sales at the American Bank Note Company. Harris held several other management positions in 15 years at BEP.

Mr. Harris holds a B.S. in business administration (labor relations) from the University of Maryland and master's degrees (public administration) from the University of Southern California and George Washington University. Harris was born in Washington, D.C. He and his wife have five children and five grandchildren and live in Annapolis, Md.
