---
title: TREASURY ANNOUNCES NEW FLETC DIRECTOR
date: 1998-01-29
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2178
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin announced today the appointment of W. Ralph Basham, a career U.S. Secret Service agent, as Director of the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC). Mr. Basham will begin his service on February 15, 1998.

Throughout Ralph Basham's career, the Secret Service has benefitted enormously from his integrity, intellect and commitment to duty, said Secretary Rubin. I am pleased that he is bringing these same qualities to the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center where he can provide the leadership necessary to train our law enforcement officers.

The FLETC, located in Glynco, Georgia and Artesia, New Mexico, provides training for nearly all the nation's federal law enforcement officers. In addition, the FLETC serves the state, local and international law enforcement communities with training programs tailored to their specific needs.

A graduate of Southeastern University, Basham began his 27-year tenure with the Secret Service in 1970 as a Special Agent assigned to the Washington Field Office. He has served as the Special Agent in Charge of the Cleveland Field Office, Special Agent in Charge of the Washington Field Office, Special Agent in Charge of the Vice Presidential Protective Division, Deputy Assistant Director of the Office of Training and most recently as the Assistant Director of the Office of Administration.

Basham is married to the former Judith A. O'Bryan of Owensboro, KY and has 3 children.
