---
title: TREASURY RELEASES PROGRESS REPORT ON TAGGANTS
date: 1998-03-04
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2271
---
*(Archived Content)*



The Treasury Department released today its Progress Report on the Study ofMarking, Rendering Inert, and Licensing of Explosive Materials as required by the Anti-Terrorismand Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996.



The Progress Report marks another step in the Clinton Administration's efforts togive law enforcement the tools it needs to reduce violent crime through bomb detection andinvestigation of criminal misuse of explosives.



Detection and identification technologies hold great promise for helping lawenforcement prevent bombings and catch bombers, said Treasury Under Secretary forEnforcement Raymond W. Kelly. We're working to ensure that the ultimate use of taggants isas effective and safe as possible.



The report identifies and evaluates a number of promising technologies that could beused to trace explosives used in bombings. The next steps outlined in the report will enableTreasury to determine the best uses of these technologies, including those commonly known astaggants.



As part of the review, ATF contracted with the National Academy of Sciences (NAS)to conduct a parallel study, which will be issued tomorrow. ATF and Treasury already areworking on several of the areas identified in the NAS review for further study.


- The[progress report on taggants](http://www.atf.gov/pub/treas_pub/taggant/97/)is available on the ATF website.
