---
title: SECRETARY SUMMERS NAMES NEW ATF DIRECTOR
date: 1999-12-17
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls297
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-297

Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers announced today the appointment of Bradley A. Buckles as Director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF). Buckles will replace John W. Magaw who retires at the end of the year after serving six years as ATF Director and more than 39 years in law enforcement.

Brad has devoted his entire professional life to the men and women of ATF and the invaluable services they provide to the American public, said Secretary Summers. I have no doubt that Brad will bring the same professionalism, expertise and integrity to the position of Director that he has demonstrated throughout his long and productive tenure with the bureau.

Buckles began his career at ATF in 1974 holding various positions in the Office of the Chief Counsel, including Deputy Chief Counsel from 1983 to 1995 and then Chief Counsel from 1995 to 1996. Since 1996, he has served as ATF's Deputy Director where he has assisted in the day-to-day management of the bureau. At the same time he has served as the bureau's Chief Operating Officer, Chair of the Executive Resources Board and Chair of its Strategic Leadership Team.

At ATF, Buckles has played a key role in every major program development area and implementation effort in ATF's jurisdiction. He has also participated in management initiatives involving personnel, budget, strategic planning, technology, organizational restructuring and leadership development. Buckles has received numerous awards including the Meritorious Presidential Rank Award in 1992 and Distinguished Presidential Rank Award in 1997.
