---
title: WEEKLY RELEASE OF U.S. RESERVE ASSETS
date: 1999-09-21
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls109
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-109

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the week ending September 17, 1999.

As this table indicates, U.S. reserve assets totaled $72,881 million as of September 17, 1999, as compared to $72,529 million as of September 10, 1999.

 

U.S. Reserve Assets

(millions of U.S. dollars)

**Week Ending Total Reserve Assets Gold Stock Special Drawing Rights   Foreign Currencies** ESF      SOMA** Reserve Position in IMF** September 10, 1999**72,529**

11,048

10,169

15,689

15,692

19,931

September 17, 1999

**72,881**

11,048

*10,175*

15,857

15,860

*19,942*   **Notes:  Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of July 31, 1999. The June 30, 1999 value was $11,046 million.** is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of July 31, 1999. The June 30, 1999 value was $11,046 million.** Special Drawing Rights (SDR) holdings and the Reserve Position in the IMF are based on IMF data and valued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for September 10, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of September 17, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the September 10, 1999 IMF data.**(SDR) holdings and the are based on IMF data and valued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for September 10, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of September 17, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the September 10, 1999 IMF data.** Foreign Currencies includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account ( SOMA). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.** includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund () and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.
