---
title: WEEKLY RELEASE OF U.S. RESERVE ASSETS
date: 1999-07-20
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls20
---
*(Archived Content)*



FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-20


  

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the week ending July 16, 1999.



As this table indicates, U.S. reserve assets totaled $70,950 million as of July 16, 1999, up from $70,645 million as of July 9, 1999.

  

U.S. Reserve Assets



(millions of U.S. dollars)

**Week Ending** **Total Reserve Assets** **Gold Stock** **Special Drawing Rights** **  Foreign Currencies**   ESF      SOMA **Reserve Position in IMF** 

July 9, 1999

**70,645** 

11,049



9,650



14,565



14,565



20,817



July 16, 1999

**70,950** 

11,049

*9,680* 

14,670



14,670

*20,881*   **Notes: ****Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of May 31, 1999. The April 30, 1999 value was $11,049 million. **is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of May 31, 1999. The April 30, 1999 value was $11,049 million. **Special Drawing Rights (SDR) holdings and the Reserve Position in the IMF are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for July 9, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of July 16, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the July 9, 1999 IMF data. **(SDR) holdings and the are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for July 9, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of July 16, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the July 9, 1999 IMF data. **Foreign Currencies includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account ( SOMA). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions. **includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund () and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.
