---
title:  TREASURY INTERNATIONAL TAX COUNSEL PHILIP R. WEST TESTIMONY BEFORE THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS
date: 1999-10-27
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls177
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-177

Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased today to recommend, on behalf of the Administration, favorable action on eight bilateral tax treaties and protocols that the President has transmitted to the Senate and that are the subject of this hearing. These agreements would provide significant benefits to the United States, as well as to our treaty partners. Treasury appreciates the Committees interest in these agreements as demonstrated by the scheduling of this hearing, and requests that the Committee and the Senate take prompt and favorable action on all of these agreements.

The treaties and protocols before the Committee today represent a cross-section of the United States tax treaty program. There are new agreements with three of our oldest treaty partners -- new income tax treaties with Denmark and Italy and a protocol to our estate tax treaty with Germany -- and five agreements -- with Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovenia and Venezuela -- expand our treaty network in Latin America, Eastern Europe, and the former Yugoslavia.

An active treaty program is important to the overall international economic policy of the United States, and tax treaties have a substantial positive impact on the after-tax profitability of United States businesses that enter a treaty partner's marketplace. This is an obvious incentive to expand our treaty network to new treaty partners. However, it also requires us to update our existing treaties. When President Clinton took office, many important U.S. tax treaties were nearly half a century old. Since the beginning of 1993, we have replaced our tax treaties with Sweden, which dated from 1939, with the Netherlands, which dated from 1948, with Ireland, which dated from 1949, and with Switzerland, which dated from 1951. The Denmark treaty, which you are considering today, will replace the oldest of our income tax treaties still in force, which was signed in 1948.

For these reasons, negotiating new treaties and updating existing treaties take up a large amount of my staffs time. We believe, however, that the investment of our resources is worthwhile because of the benefits a modern treaty network brings both to taxpayers and to the government. I'd like to speak now about these benefits.

**Benefits to Taxpayers**An income tax treaty removes impediments to international trade and investment by reducing the threat of double taxation that can occur when both countries impose tax on the same income. Four different aspects of this general goal illustrate the point. First, an income tax treaty generally increases the extent to which exporters can engage in trading activity in the other country without triggering tax. Second, when taxpayers do engage in a sufficient amount of activity for tax to be imposed, the treaty establishes rules that assign to one country or the other the primary right of taxation with respect to an item of income, that help ensure the allowance of appropriate deductions and that reduce withholding tax on payments of income to the treaty beneficiary. Third, the treaty provides a dispute resolution mechanism to prevent double taxation that sometimes can arise in spite of the treaty. Finally, the treaty helps to create stability of tax rules that the private sector needs if its member are to be confident in their projections of an investments return.

Although the domestic tax legislation of the United States and other countries in many ways is intended to further the same general objectives as our treaty program, a treaty goes beyond what domestic legislation can achieve. Legislation cannot easily take into account differences among other countries' rules for the taxation of particular classes of income and how those rules interact with United States law. Legislation also cannot reflect variations in the United States' bilateral relations with our treaty partners. A treaty, on the other hand, can make useful distinctions, and alter in an appropriate manner the domestic statutory law of both countries as it applies to income flowing between the treaty partners. Examples in the treaties before you include reductions in statutory withholding tax rates and the creditability of the Italian tax known as the IRAP.

One of the principal ways in which double taxation is eliminated is by assigning primary taxing jurisdiction in particular factual settings to one treaty partner or the other. In the absence of a treaty, a United States company operating a branch or division or providing services in another country might be subject to income tax in both countries on the income generated by such operations. The resulting double taxation can impose an oppressive financial burden on the operation and might well make it economically non-viable.

For example, lesser developed countries frequently assert much broader taxing jurisdiction than the United States does. In the absence of a treaty, they might well tax a foreign corporation on income from business activities even if the activities conducted in the other country are relatively negligible or, in some cases, if the payor of the income is a resident of the developing country without regard to whether any activities take place within its territory. In many cases, the country will not allow the foreign corporation to deduct business expenses relating to such income. Finally, the foreign corporation may not be able to plan its activities in such a way as to avoid the tax because the rules that establish the taxation threshold under the countrys domestic laws may not be clear. If the economic activities that give rise to the income take place in the United States, we would view the income as being from U.S. sources. In cases where a foreign corporation taxes income that we view as U.S.-source, the effect of the U.S. tax rules may be to deny a foreign tax credit in whole or in part (depending on the U.S. corporations overall foreign tax credit situation).

Tax treaties help to resolve these situations by establishing the minimum level of economic activity that a resident of one country must engage in within the other before the latter country may tax the resulting business profits. The tax treaty lays out ground rules providing that one country or the other, but not both, will have primary taxing jurisdiction over branch operations and individuals performing services in the other country. In general terms, the treaty provides that if the branch operations have sufficient substance and continuity and, accordingly, sufficient economic penetration, the country where the activities occur will have primary (but not exclusive) jurisdiction to tax. In other cases, where the operations are relatively minor, the home country retains the sole jurisdiction to tax.

Under these treaty rules, United States manufacturers may test a market by establishing a foreign presence through which products are sold without subjecting themselves to foreign tax, including compliance, rules. Generally, if the market proves promising, the company will establish a more substantial operation which would become subject to tax in the other country. Similarly, United States residents generally may live and work abroad for short periods without becoming subject to the other country's taxing jurisdiction; if they stay longer, however, they would become subject to tax on the income derived in the other country or, ultimately, might even become subject to taxation as residents. These rules, the permanent establishment and business profits rules and analogous provisions for individuals, not only eliminate in many cases the difficult task of allocating income and tax between countries but also serve to encourage desirable trade activities by eliminating or reducing what can often be complex tax compliance requirements.

High withholding taxes at source can be an impediment to international economic activity. Under United States domestic law, all payments to non-United States persons of dividends and royalties as well as certain payments of interest are subject to withholding tax equal to 30 percent of the gross amount paid. Inasmuch as this tax is imposed on a gross rather than net amount, it imposes a high cost on investors receiving such payments. Indeed, in many cases the cost of such taxes can be prohibitive as a 30 percent tax on gross income often can exceed 100 percent of the net income. Most of our trading partners impose similar levels of withholding tax on these types of income. Tax treaties alleviate this burden by reducing the levels of withholding tax that the treaty partners may impose on these types of income. In general, United States policy is to reduce the rate of withholding taxation on interest and royalties to zero. Dividends normally are subject to tax at one of two rates, 15 percent on portfolio investors and 5 percent on direct corporate investors. The extent to which we realize our policy of reducing withholding rates depends on a number of factors. Although generalizations often are difficult to make in the context of complex negotiations, it is fair to say that we are more successful in reducing these rates with countries that are relatively developed and where there are substantial reciprocal income flows. We also achieve lesser but still significant reductions with countries where the flows tend to be disproportionately in favor of the United States.

The benefits of tax treaties are not limited to business profits earned by companies. Treaties remove tax impediments to desirable scientific, educational, cultural and athletic interchanges, facilitating our ability to benefit from the skills and talents of foreigners including world-renowned rock stars, symphony orchestras, astrophysicists and Olympic athletes. In fact, treaty benefits are not limited to profit-making enterprises but extend to pension plans, Social Security benefits, charitable organizations, researchers and alimony and child support recipients.

The rules provided in the treaty frequently do not explicitly address every future development. This may be because the international community has not yet reached a consensus on the appropriate standard for taxation. For example, the international community may take some time to reach a consensus on the appropriate taxation standard with respect to the area of communications technology. This is an area in which international cooperation is vitally important. To address these issues, our proposed treaties with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. require the parties to consult within five years after the treaties enter into force concerning the taxation of income from new technologies. This period was chosen because of the possibility that an international standard might emerge within that time that both Contracting States would want to consider adopting. In fact, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, recognized as the leading international forum to consider developments such as these, is considering these issues today. Until resolution is reached, the treaties with the Baltic countries provide that income of a resident of one country from transmission by satellite, cable, optic fiber and similar technologies will not be taxable in the other country unless the resident has a permanent establishment in the other country. We rejected an approach that would have taxed this income like a royalty, subject to withholding.

Even with constant monitoring, there will be cases in which double taxation occurs in spite of the treaty. In such cases, the treaty provides mechanisms enabling the tax authorities of the two governments -- known as the competent authorities in tax treaty parlance -- to consult and reach an agreement under which the taxpayer's income is allocated between the two taxing jurisdictions on a consistent basis, thereby preventing the double taxation. The U.S. competent authority under our tax treaties is the Secretary of the Treasury. Currently, that function is delegated to the Assistant Commissioner (International) of the Internal Revenue Service.

One of the most common situations in which this type of agreement may be necessary is in the area of transfer pricing. If a multinational manipulates the prices charged in transactions between its affiliates in different countries, the income reported for tax purposes in one country may be artificially depressed, and the tax administration of that country will collect less tax from the enterprise than it should. In theory, the multinational would plan its transactions to ensure that its income is reported in the jurisdiction with the lowest effective tax rate. It is this possibility that makes transfer pricing one of the most important international tax issues.

If this potential tax avoidance (and the potential for double taxation) is to be avoided, it is necessary to have a benchmark by which to evaluate the prices charged. The benchmark adopted by the United States and all our major trading partners is the arm's-length standard. Under the arm's-length standard, the price charged should be the same as it would have been had the parties to the transaction been unrelated to one another -- in other words, the same as if they had bargained at arm's-length. This requires an analysis of the functions performed, resources employed and risks assumed by each party, to make sure each party is adequately compensated for those functions, resources and risks in light of the contractual terms and other relevant economic circumstances of the transaction. If taxpayers and tax administrators can find similar transactions that took place between unrelated parties, they begin the inquiry by analyzing those transactions to see whether the functions, resources and risks of each party are comparable to those in the related party transaction.

In more and more cases, it is difficult or impossible to find a uniquely comparable transaction. This may be because the transactions between related parties are highly specialized or involve unique intangibles, or, as in the case of certain kinds of global securities trading, the functions are so highly integrated that there is a single profit center and no transactions are ever booked between the separate entities. In those cases, it will not be possible to apply traditional transactional methods. Instead, taxpayers and tax administrators will have to perform the functional analysis required by the arms-length approach, but will use transactional profits methods, such as the comparable profits method or the profit-split method, in order to compensate the entities for the functions performed, resources employed and risks assumed. The Internal Revenue Service developed transactional profits methods in the 1980's because it saw that it would not always be possible to use traditional transactional methods. These methods, including the use of multi-factor formulas in appropriate cases, were found by the OECD to be an acceptable application of the arms length standard, at least as a method of last resort, in the Transfer Pricing Guidelines issued in 1995 and its report on Global Trading of Financial Instruments in 1998. We have seen, and expect to continue to see, increasing acceptance of these profits-based approaches in the coming years, speeded by the increase in globally-integrated businesses that will become possible as a result of improvements in telecommunications technology.

Perhaps because of globalization, there has also been an increased focus in recent years on the taxation of branches (known as permanent establishments. Treaties use the same arms length standard to determine the profits attributable to a permanent establishment. Many of the legal developments that have occurred in the context of the taxation of separate legal entities, however, have not yet been extrapolated to the branch situation. Because the commentaries to the relevant parts of the OECD model tax treaty have not yet been revised to reflect current thinking regarding profit splits, taxpayers have taken inconsistent approaches in the context of permanent establishments. One recent court case suggests that it is not possible to use profits-based methods in determining the business profits attributable to a permanent establishment, and that the tax administrator is required to respect the income shown on the books of the branch, except in exceptional circumstances, a much higher standard than applies when adjusting the income of separate legal entities. A more recent case would allow the administrators to adjust the branch books to reflect an arms length result, but does not provide any guidance on how that is to be accomplished.

We believe that an international consensus eventually will develop around the proposition thatanyof the methods that are acceptable for transfer pricing between related entities will also be acceptable in the context of allocating income between branches of a single entity. The United States has already adopted this approach in the context of global dealing of financial instruments, both in advance pricing agreements and by regulation, as has the OECD in its report on Global Trading in Financial Instruments. It has done so by sanctioning the use of multi-factor formulas to allocate income from global trading activity under one common trading model -- the functionally fully-integrated model.

**Prevention of Tax Avoidance and Evasion**The foregoing aspects of our tax treaties involve benefits to taxpayers. While providing these benefits certainly is a major purpose of any tax treaty, it is not the only purpose. The second major objective of our income tax treaty program is to prevent tax avoidance and evasion and to ensure that treaty benefits flow only to the intended recipients. Tax treaties achieve this objective in several ways. They provide for exchange of information between the tax authorities. They contain provisions designed to ensure that treaty benefits are limited to*bona fide *residents of the other treaty country and not to treaty shoppers. And two of the treaties before you reflect one version of an anti-abuse rule that set limits on aggressive tax avoidance transactions using treaties.

Under the tax treaties, the competent authorities are authorized to exchange information, including confidential taxpayer information, as may be necessary for the proper administration of the countries' tax laws. This aspect of our tax treaty program is one of the most important features of a tax treaty from the standpoint of the United States. The information that is exchanged may be used for a variety of purposes. For instance, the information may be used to identify unreported income or to investigate a transfer pricing case. In recent years information exchange has become a priority for the United States in its tax treaty program. If a country has bank secrecy rules that prevent or seriously inhibit the exchange of information under the tax treaty, we will not conclude a treaty with it. In fact, we generally do not even negotiate with such countries. Information exchange is one of the handful of issues that we discuss with the other country before beginning formal negotiations because it is one of a very few issues that we consider non-negotiable. This has, of course, prevented us from entering into treaties with some countries with which we have significant economic ties, but we believe that it is the right policy.

Recent technological developments which facilitate international, and anonymous, communications and commercial and financial activities can also encourage illegal activities.

Over the past several years we have experienced a marked and important sea change as many of the industrialized nations have recognized the increasing importance of tax information exchange; the absence thereof serves to encourage not only tax avoidance and evasion, but also criminal tax fraud, money laundering, illegal drug trafficking, and other criminal activity. Treasury is proud of the role it has played in moving these issues forward not only in our bilateral treaty negotiations but also in other fora such as the OECD.

A second aspect of U.S. tax treaty policy to deal with avoidance and evasion is to include in all treaties comprehensive provisions designed to prevent "treaty shopping." This abuse of the treaty can take a number of forms, but it generally involves a resident of a third state that has either no treaty with the United States or a relatively unfavorable one establishing an entity in a treaty partner that has a relatively favorable treaty with the United States. This entity is used to hold title to the person's United States investments, which could range from portfolio stock investments to major direct investments or other treaty-favored assets in the United States. By placing the investment in the treaty partner, the third-country person is able to withdraw the returns from the United States investment subject to the favorable rates provided in the tax treaty, rather than the higher rates that would be imposed if the person had invested directly into the United States. Of course, the tax imposed by the treaty partner on the intermediate entity must be relatively low, or the structure will not produce tax savings that justify the added transaction costs.

This Committee and the Congress have expressed strong concerns about treaty shopping, and the Treasury Department shares those concerns. Our treaty program is designed to give benefits to residents and, if applicable, nationals of our treaty partner. Treaty shopping represents an abusive attempt to siphon benefits to others. Moreover, if treaty shopping is allowed to occur, then there is less incentive for the third country with which the United States has no treaty to negotiate a treaty with the United States. The third country can maintain inappropriate barriers to United States investment and trade, and yet its companies can obtain the benefits of lower U.S. tax by organizing their United States transactions so that they flow through a country with a favorable United States tax treaty.

For these reasons, the United States has taken a leading role in developing anti-treaty-shopping provisions and encouraging other countries to adopt the provisions in their treaties. The Department of the Treasury has included in all its recent tax treaties comprehensive limitation on benefits provisions that limit the benefits of the treaty to*bona fide*residents of the treaty partner. These provisions are not uniform, as each country has its own characteristics that make it more or less inviting to treaty shopping in particular ways. Consequently, each provision must to some extent be tailored to fit the facts and circumstances of the treaty partners' internal laws and practices. Moreover, the provisions need to strike a balance that avoids interfering with legitimate and desirable economic activity.

As we have pursued our goal of updating our existing treaties to eliminate treaty-shopping abuses, however, we have seen an increasing number of other types of transactions that seek to use treaties to achieve inappropriate results. Therefore, we have decided to include in our treaties relatively modest anti-abuse rules in addition to the limitation on benefits provision. In the treaties before you, these rules are found only in the treaties with Italy and Slovenia, because the others were substantially negotiated before this change in our policy.

As described above, anti-treaty shopping rules are now firmly entrenched in our treaty policy, in part as a result of concerns raised by the Committee. The anti-abuse rules before you are complementary to these anti-treaty shopping rules. Anti-treaty shopping rules take the broad approach of denying all treaty benefits to persons who are not bona fide residents of the treaty country. Anti-abuse rules such as those before you are more targeted in the sense that they are not blanket exclusions from all treaty benefits; they deny specific treaty benefits in abuse cases.

These rules have been included in our treaties because of several concurrent developments in international tax law. First, although the overwhelming majority of taxpayers who avail themselves of treaty benefits are entitled to those benefits and are not engaged in abusive transactions, aggressive abuse of treaties has increased. As evidence of this trend one need only observe that Congress has twice in recent years taken the unusual step of legislating against treaty abuse. Most recently, Congress enacted section 894(c) to deny benefits to certain taxpayers that are not excluded from our treaties under limitation on benefits provisions. Congress also enacted section 7701(l), providing the Treasury with a broad grant of regulatory authority to curb treaty abuse. This authority has been exercised to adopt a standard very similar to that under consideration by you today, under which taxpayers have been operating for some years now, apparently without significant difficulty. (The commentary to Article 1 of the OECD model tax treaty and the OECD Report on Harmful Tax competition make clear that countries can impose their domestic anti-abuse rules to claims for treaty benefits.)

A second development contributed to the decision to include these rules in our treaties. We observed that Italy had just concluded a treaty containing a broader but more subjective anti-abuse rule. We then observed that virtually all of the other countries with which we were negotiating at the time either had treaty anti-abuse precedents generally consistent with the rule you have before you (the United Kingdom, Chile and Korea) or, in the case of Canada, had already included in its treaty with the United States an explicit recognition of the right to apply a similar anti-abuse rule that was in force under its domestic law. In addition, other countries such as Ireland and Mexico had agreed to a similar provision with each other and other countries such as Israel were consistently seeking even broader provisions. The rule has been included in more than 50 treaties, representing approximately 40 different countries (including 10 OECD members). In fact, concerns about the adequacy of current treaty rules to prevent abuses have stimulated work in the OECD on this subject. As one of the more common approaches to achieving such an objective, rules such as those before you today are obviously part of that work.

The increase in treaty abuse has unfortunate results for both Treasury and our taxpayers: it requires Treasury to divert resources to fighting abuse that it might otherwise devote to improving our treaty network. The emergence internationally of anti-abuse rules such as those before you provides a win-win solution. They help address the abuse problem, while at the same time freeing up Treasury resources to provide greater benefits for U.S. taxpayers. As such, the question became not whether an anti-abuse rule was appropriate, but which anti-abuse rule was appropriate. Treasury rejected a narrower anti-abuse rule because of its ineffectiveness. Treasury also rejected a broader more subjective anti-abuse rule for several reasons. First, it provided a less certain standard against which a taxpayer could meaningfully evaluate its transaction. Second, since the narrower rule before you appears in a significant number of treaties around the world, and promises to appear in more, it is more consistent with international norms and will likely be the subject of more interpretive law than the other standards.

As such, the proposed rule should provide greater certainty over time than some of the alternatives. Nevertheless, we are aware of concerns that the proposed anti-abuse rules will provide uncertainty for taxpayers. The test incorporated in the rule does require taxpayers and their advisors to make some judgements. This standard creates no more uncertainty, however, than other U.S. tax doctrines that may also apply to the transaction under consideration, such as the business purpose and step transaction doctrines. And, as the commentary to the OECD model treaty makes clear, even if our treaties are silent regarding abuse, other countries may apply their own internal anti-abuse doctrines to U.S. taxpayers claims for treaty benefits, whether we have explicitly agreed to those standards or not.

Our treaties are intended to last decades before re-negotiation. Therefore, relying on treaty amendments to eliminate abuses that arise in the future will invariably prove inadequate. Moreover, relying on amendments to domestic law will invite charges that the treaty is being overridden, as were made when section 894(c) was enacted. For these reasons, the treaties should contain their own mechanisms to combat abuse, such as the provisions in the treaties before you today. In this regard, it is important to keep in mind that our tax treaties contain only benefits for taxpayers, and no provisions that increase tax burdens. As such, it is appropriate to impose reasonable limits on those benefits to curb abusive transactions that may be developed in the future.

**Treaty Program and Negotiation Priorities**Given all of these benefits to taxpayers and the government, an obvious question is why we do not have a tax treaty with every country. The answer is slightly different for each potential treaty partner, but there are some general themes. In establishing priorities, we keep in mind the two principal objectives of tax treaties -- to prevent both double taxation and tax avoidance and evasion.

The United States has a network of 50 bilateral income tax treaties, the first of which was negotiated in 1939. Although that number is somewhat lower than the number of treaties that some other countries have, it is important to note that the network includes all 28 of our fellow members of the OECD and covers the vast majority of trade and investment by U.S. companies abroad. For the past decade, the Treasury Department has given priority to renegotiating older treaties to ensure that they reflect current United States treaty policy, particularly with respect to anti-abuse provisions and information exchange.

As demonstrated by the mix of treaties being considered today, the progress we have made at updating old conventions has given us the opportunity to focus on expanding our treaty network. In this, our primary concern is to conclude treaties or protocols that are likely to provide the greatest benefits to United States taxpayers, such as when economic relations are hindered by substantial tax obstacles. We meet regularly with members of the U.S. business community regarding their priorities and the practical problems they face with respect to particular countries. We are proud of our efforts in the treaty area, and believe that our record of accomplishment here is as strong as that of any other administration in recent memory.

Even when business identifies problems that could be resolved by treaty, however, a treaty may not be appropriate for a variety of reasons. Despite the protections of the limitation on benefits provisions and anti-abuse rules, there may be countries with which we choose not to have a tax treaty because of the possibility of abuse. Other countries may not present us with sufficient tax problems that are best resolved by treaty. For example, we generally do not conclude tax treaties with jurisdictions that do not impose significant income taxes, because there is little danger of double taxation of income in such a case. In such cases, particularly with Caribbean Basin countries, we have offered to enter into an agreement limited to the exchange of tax information, which furthers the goal of reducing tax avoidance and evasion without creating other opportunities for abuse.

However, the situation can become more complex when a country adopts a special regime for certain parts of the economy while the rest of its residents are subject to substantial taxation. It might be considered inappropriate to grant treaty benefits to companies taking advantage of such regimes, while a treaty relationship might be useful and appropriate in order to avoid double taxation in the case of the residents who are subject to substantial taxation. Accordingly, in some cases we have devised treaties that carve out from the benefits of the treaties certain residents and activities. The anti-treaty shopping provisions in our treaty network prevent investors from enjoying the benefits of a tax-haven regime or preferential tax regime in their home country and, at the same time, the benefits of a treaty between the United States and another country. The recent OECD report on Harmful Tax Competition recommends that member countries adopt similar policies, and not enter into tax treaties with tax havens. The report also directed the group within the Committee on Fiscal Affairs that is responsible for the OECD Model treaty to consider various additions to the Model that are intended to prevent abuse of tax treaties.

Prospective treaty partners also have to indicate that they understand their obligations under the treaty, including with respect to information exchange, and demonstrate that they are able to comply with those obligations. Sometimes they are unable to do so. In other cases we may feel that a treaty is inappropriate because a treaty partner may be unwilling to deal with the tax problems that have been identified by business. Lesser developed and newly emerging economies, where capital and trade flows are often disproportionate or virtually one-way, may not be willing to reduce withholding taxes to a level that will eliminate double taxation because they feel that they cannot give up scarce tax revenues. None of the new treaties that we have asked you to consider today are in that class. All are with countries that showed a willingness to reduce or eliminate withholding taxes or other impediments to investment.

Most of the emerging economies with which we have had successful treaty discussions -- including those whose treaties we present today -- have been active participants in the training and outreach programs run by the Treasury Department, the Internal Revenue Service and the OECD. These programs are a wise investment as they help to ensure that all parties understand the international norms that are represented by these agreements. We have every reason to believe that these programs will continue to increase the number of countries -- particularly in Eastern Europe and Latin America -- that are ready to enter into mutually advantageous treaties with us. In many cases, the existence of a treaty that lowers taxation of trade and investment will help to establish economic ties that will contribute to the country's stability and independence, as well as improve its political relationships with the United States.

The primary constraint on the size of our treaty network, however, may be the complexity of the negotiations themselves. The various functions performed by tax treaties, and particularly the goal of meshing two different tax systems, makes the process of negotiation quite time-consuming.

A nations tax policy, as reflected in its domestic tax legislation as well as its tax treaty positions, reflects the sovereign choices made by that country in the exercise of one of its most important governmental functions, that of funding the government. Numerous features of the treaty partner's unique tax legislation and its interaction with United States legislation must be considered in negotiating an appropriate treaty. Examples include whether the country eliminates double taxation through an exemption or a credit system, whether the country has bank secrecy legislation that needs to be modified by treaty, the treatment of partnerships and other transparent entities, and how the country taxes contributions to pension funds, the funds themselves and distributions from the funds. A negotiated treaty needs to take into account all of these and many other aspects of the treaty partner's tax system in order to arrive at an acceptable treaty from the perspective of the United States. Accordingly, a simple side-by-side comparison of two actual treaties, or of a proposed treaty against a model treaty, will not enable meaningful conclusions to be drawn as to whether a proposed treaty reflects an appropriate balancing of interests. In many cases the differences are of little substantive importance, reflecting language problems, cultural obstacles or other impediments to the use of particular U.S. or OECD language.

In addition to keeping in mind that each treaty must be adapted to the individual facts and circumstances of each treaty partner, it also is important to remember that each treaty is the result of a negotiated bargain between two countries that often have conflicting objectives. Each country has certain issues that it considers non-negotiable. The United States, which insists on effective anti-abuse and exchange-of-information provisions, and which must accommodate its uniquely complex internal laws, probably has more non-negotiable issues than most countries. For example, each of the full treaties before the Committee today allows the United States to impose our branch profits tax and branch-level interest tax at the rates applicable to direct dividends and interest, respectively, paid to related parties. All of them also reflect our new policy with respect to dividend distributions from real estate investment trusts, except for the treaties with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, which were fully negotiated before the change in policy. They also include the saving clause, which permits the United States to tax its citizens and residents as if the treaty had not come into effect, and allow the United States to apply its rules dealing with former citizens and long-term residents and with investments in U.S. real property interests.

Obtaining the agreement of our treaty partners on these issues sometimes requires other concessions on our part. Similarly, other countries sometimes must make concessions to obtain our agreement on issues that are critical to them. Eventually, the process of give-and-take produces a document that is the best treaty that is possible with that other country. In many cases, the process ends there, as the Administration decides that the treaty does not further the interests of the United States enough to justify the necessary compromises. These treaties never make it to this Committee. Accordingly, each treaty that we present here represents not only the best deal that we believe we can achieve with the particular country at this time, but also constitutes an agreement that we believe is in the best interests of the United States. The technical explanations which accompany our treaty, the discussions with the staffs of this Committee and its members, and the staffs of the tax-writing Committees, and most importantly, hearings such as this, will provide the Senate with the assurance that a particular treaty is, overall, in the best interests of the United States.

**Discussion of Treaties and Protocols**Each of the treaties before you today reflects the basic principles of current United States treaty policy. The provisions in each treaty borrow heavily from recent treaties approved by the Senate and the U.S. model and are generally consistent with the 1992 OECD Model Income Tax Convention, as subsequently amended. The United States was and continues to be an active participant in the development of the OECD Model, and we are generally able to use most of its provisions as a basis for negotiations.

The U.S. model was published in September 1996. A model treaty is a useful device if used properly and kept current. In the course of the negotiation of these treaties, we discovered that certain provisions of our model treaty could be improved upon, and we did so in these agreements. Many of these improvements have become part of the document that we use to begin negotiations and we expect that they will be reflected in a new version of the U.S. model that will be published in the future.

There are no major inconsistencies between the U.S. and OECD models, but rather the U.S. model elaborates on issues in which the United States may have a greater interest or which result from particular aspects of United States law and policy. For example, our limitation of benefits provisions are generally not found in typical tax treaties of other OECD countries. We have also found it useful to expand on treaty coverage and treatment of pass-through entities such as our limited liability companies. Despite the importance we attach to the OECD model and our continuing efforts with our colleagues to improve it and keep it current, most countries cannot accede to all of the provisions of that model, nor do we expect that all of our prospective treaty partners will agree with all of the provisions of our model. The primary benefit of the U.S. Model is that it enables all interested parties, including this Committee and the Congress and its staffs, the American business community, and our prospective treaty partners, to know and understand our treaty positions. We do not anticipate that the United States will ever sign a tax convention identical to the model; there are too many variables.

Nevertheless, there are some basic provisions that are found in all of the treaties. These include provisions designed to improve the administration both of the treaty and of the underlying tax systems, including rules concerning exchange of information, mutual administrative assistance, dispute resolution and nondiscrimination. Each treaty permits the General Accounting Office and the tax-writing committees of Congress to obtain access to certain tax information exchanged under treaty for use in their oversight of the administration of United States tax laws and treaties. Each treaty also contains a now-standard provision ensuring that tax discrimination disputes between the two nations generally will be resolved within the ambit of the tax treaty, and not under any other dispute resolution mechanisms, including the World Trade Organization (WTO).

Finally, some treaties will have special provisions not found in other agreements. These provisions account for unique or unusual aspects of the treaty partner's internal laws or circumstances. For example, many well-known Danish multinational companies are owned in part by taxable non-stock corporations. If the treaty had not included special rules for taxable non-stock corporations, the multinationals might not have qualified for full treaty benefits, even though they clearly are not treaty-shopping. These rules had to be tailored to the Danish law and the specific manner in which the taxable non-stock corporations operate, without violating any of the basic principles underlying our limitation on benefits provisions. The flexibility we bring to the table should be regarded as a strength rather than a weakness of the tax treaty program, since it is these differences in the treaties which enable us to reach agreement and thereby reduce taxation at source, prevent double taxation and increase tax cooperation.

I would like to discuss the importance and purposes of each agreement that you have been asked to consider. We have submitted Technical Explanations of each agreement that contain detailed discussions of each treaty and protocol. These Technical Explanations serve as an official guide to each agreement. We have furnished our treaty partners with a copy of the relevant technical explanation and offered them the opportunity to submit their comments and suggestions.

The Baltic Treaties -- Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania

I would now like to turn to the three treaties colloquially known as the Baltic Treaties. Since gaining independence from the Soviet Union at the beginning of this decade, the three Baltic States Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania have actively pursued reforms aimed at economic stabilization and market strengthening. These reforms have placed Estonia in the first wave of Central and East European applicants to the European Union, while Latvia and Lithuania are currently under consideration by the EU for promotion to this first wave. Economic performance in all three countries over the past several years has been among the best in the region.

Entering into these treaties is an important element in our current tax treaty program and is a high priority with the U.S. business community. Without the current treaty, U.S. businesses are at a competitive disadvantage in the Baltics, since many of their competitors are from countries that have concluded a tax treaty with them. Under the proposed Conventions, the Baltic States taxation of U.S. operations would decrease on direct investment dividends, copyright royalties (including software), royalties on the right to use equipment, and interest paid on loans guaranteed by the U.S. Export-Import Bank. In addition, the proposed Convention would provide U.S. business a greater degree of certainty, protection against discriminatory tax practices and the ability to resolve potential double taxation cases and other disputes.

Although these Conventions were largely negotiated at joint sessions, these are, of course, three separate treaties with three separate, sovereign nations. I will, therefore, deal with each of the three separately. In general, however, it should be noted that none of the three deviates substantially from any of our more recent treaties.

Estonia

Let me first deal with Estonia. The treaty does differ from other recent U.S. treaties in a number of respects. I will now highlight some of these differences as well as other important provisions of the treaty.

First, in respect of the taxation of investment income. The withholding rates under the treaty are in some respects higher than those in the U.S. Model and in many recent U.S. treaties with OECD countries. The rates are the same as in many Estonian treaties. Under the treaty dividends are subject to taxation at source in the same manner as under the U.S. Model. Direct investment dividends are subject to withholding tax at source at a maximum 5 percent rate, and portfolio dividends are taxable at a maximum 15 percent rate. The treaty requires a 10 percent ownership threshold for application of the 5 percent tax rate.

The treaty provides for a maximum 10 percent rate of tax at source on most interest payments. Interest earned on trade credits, and on government debt, including debt guaranteed by government agencies (e.g., the U.S. Export-Import Bank) is exempt from tax at source.

Royalties for the use of industrial, commercial or scientific equipment are subject to a 5 percent tax at source. All other royalties (including payments for the use of software, other than off-the-shelf software) are taxed at a maximum rate of 10 percent.

In relation to the taxation of business income, consistent with the U.S. and OECD Models, the treaty provides generally for the taxation by one State of the business profits of a resident of the other only when such profits are attributable to a permanent establishment located in that other State. The treaty, however, includes an anti-abuse rule that would allow the source state to tax sales or activities performed by the enterprise outside the United States as if they were performed by a permanent establishment if it is ascertained that such activities were structured with the intention to avoid taxation in the State where the permanent establishment is situated.

The treaty, consistent with current U.S. treaty policy, provides for exclusive residence-country taxation of profits from international carriage by aircraft and ships. This reciprocal exemption also extends to income from the rental of aircraft, ships and containers if the rental activity is incidental to the operation of aircraft and ships by the lessor in international traffic. However, income from the international rental of ships and aircraft that is non-incidental to operation of ships and aircrafts is taxed at a 5 percent rate as a royalty paid for the rental of equipment.

Income from the use or rental of containers that is non-incidental to the operation of ships or aircraft in international traffic is treated as other income. Therefore, non-incidental leasing of containers by U.S. businesses is taxable only in the United States.

With regard to the taxation of personal services income, the taxation of income from the performance of personal services under the treaty is generally similar to that under the U.S. Model, but, like some U.S. treaties with developing countries, it grants a taxing right to the host country with respect to certain categories of personal services income that is somewhat broader than in the OECD or U.S. Model.

The limitation on benefits provisions are similar to those found in the U.S. Model and in all recent U.S. treaties.

The exchange of information provisions generally follow the U.S. Model and make clear that Estonia is obligated to provide U.S. tax officials such information as is necessary to carry out the provisions of the treaty.

The treaty provides a U.S. foreign tax credit for the Estonian income taxes covered by the Treaty, and a Estonian foreign tax credit for the U.S. income taxes covered by the treaty.

The treaty will enter into force after each State has notified the other that it has completed its ratification requirements. It will have effect, with respect to taxes withheld at the source, for amounts paid or credited on or after the first day of January of the calendar year next following the year in which the treaty enters into force. In other cases the treaty will have effect with respect to taxable years beginning on or after the first day of January of the calendar year next following the year in which the treaty enters into force. The treaty will remain in force indefinitely unless terminated by one of the Contracting States. Either State will be able to terminate the treaty at the end of any calendar year by giving written notice at least six months before the end of that calendar year.

Unique to the treaty and the treaties with Latvia and Lithuania is an agreement that there will be a five-year period within which the appropriate authorities of the two States will meet to discuss the application of the treaty to income derived from new technologies (such as payments received for transmission by satellite, cable, optic fibre or similar technology). The meeting may result in a protocol that specifically addresses the treatys application to income from new technologies.

Latvia

Next I will turn to Latvia. This treaty also differs in some respects from other recent U.S. tax treaties. I will again highlight some of these differences as well as other important provisions of the treaty.

In respect of the taxation of investment income, the withholding rates under the treaty are, again, in some respects higher than those in the U.S. Model and in many recent U.S. treaties with OECD countries. The proposed rates are the same as in many Latvian treaties.

Under the treaty dividends are subject to taxation at source in the same manner as under the U.S. Model. Direct investment dividends are subject to withholding tax at source at a maximum 5 percent rate, and portfolio dividends are taxable at a maximum 15 percent rate. The treaty requires a 10 percent ownership threshold for application of the 5 percent tax rate.

The treaty provides for a maximum 10 percent rate of tax at source on most interest payments. Interest earned on trade credits, and on government debt, including debt guaranteed by government agencies (e.g., the U.S. Export-Import Bank) is exempt from tax at source.

Royalties for the use of industrial, commercial or scientific equipment are subject to a 5 percent tax at source. All other royalties (including payments for the use of software, other than off-the-shelf software) are taxed at a maximum rate of 10 percent.

In relation to the taxation of business income, consistent with the U.S. and OECD Models, the treaty provides generally for the taxation by one State of the business profits of a resident of the other only when such profits are attributable to a permanent establishment located in that other State. The treaty, however, includes an anti-abuse rule that would allow the source state to tax sales or activities performed by the enterprise outside the United States as if they were performed by a permanent establishment if it is ascertained that such activities were structured with the intention to avoid taxation in the State where the permanent establishment is situated.

The treaty, consistent with current U.S. treaty policy, provides for exclusive residence-country taxation of profits from international carriage by aircraft and ships. This reciprocal exemption also extends to income from the rental of aircraft, ships and containers if the rental activity is incidental to the operation of aircraft and ships by the lessor in international traffic. However, income from the international rental of ships and aircraft that is non-incidental to operation of ships and aircrafts is taxed at a 5 percent rate as a royalty paid for the rental of equipment.

Income from the use or rental of containers that is non-incidental to the operation of ships or aircraft in international traffic is treated as other income. Therefore, non-incidental leasing of containers by U.S. businesses is taxable only in the United States.

With regard to the taxation of offshore activities, the treaty contains a reciprocal agreement, found in several U.S. treaties, particularly those with our North Sea partners, that the income from the exploration or exploitation of the seabed and sub-soil is taxable by the source State if the activities are carried on for more than 30 days in any twelve month period. Wages, salaries and similar remuneration paid to those whose employment is derived from such activities can be taxed in the state where the offshore activities occur if such activities exceed the 30 day threshold. However, that same remuneration can be taxed only in the non-source State if the period of activity does not exceed 30 days and the employer is not a resident of the source State. If the wages, salaries or other remuneration are derived from the transportation of supplies or from other activities (such as tugboats) auxiliary to the exploration and exploitation then that remuneration can be taxed only in the country of which the employer is resident.

The taxation of income from the performance of personal services under the treaty is generally similar to that under the U.S. Model, but, like some U.S. treaties with developing countries, it grants a taxing right to the host country with respect to certain categories of personal services income that is somewhat broader than in the OECD or U.S. Model.

The limitation on benefits rules of the treaty are similar to those found in the U.S. Model and in all recent U.S. treaties.

The exchange of information provisions generally follow the U.S. Model and make clear that Latvia is obligated to provide U.S. tax officials such information as is necessary to carry out the provisions of the treaty.

The treaty provides a U.S. foreign tax credit for the Latvian income taxes covered by the treaty, and a Latvian foreign tax credit for the U.S. income taxes covered by the treaty.

The treaty will enter into force after each State has notified the other that it has completed its ratification requirements. It will have effect, with respect to taxes withheld at the source, for amounts paid or credited on or after the first day of January of the calendar year next following the year in which the treaty enters into force. In other cases the treaty will have effect with respect to taxable years beginning on or after the first day of January of the calendar year next following the year in which the treaty enters into force.

The treaty will remain in force indefinitely unless terminated by one of the Contracting States. Either State will be able to terminate the treaty at the end of any calendar year by giving written notice at least six months before the end of that calendar year.

Unique to the treaty and the treaties with Estonia and Lithuania is an agreement that there will be a five-year period within which the appropriate authorities of the two States will meet to discuss the application of the treaty to income derived from new technologies (such as payments received for transmission by satellite, cable, optic fibre or similar technology). The meeting may result in a protocol that specifically addresses the treatys application to income from new technologies.

Lithuania

Finally, let me turn to Lithuania. As with the other two Baltic treaties, this treaty differs in some respects from other recent U.S. tax treaties. I will again highlight some of these differences as well as other important provisions of the treaty.

Once again, the withholding rates under the treaty are, in some respects higher than those in the U.S. Model and in many recent U.S. treaties with OECD countries. The proposed rates are the same as in many Lithuanian treaties.

Under the treaty, dividends are subject to taxation at source in the same manner as under the U.S. Model. Direct investment dividends are subject to withholding tax at source at a maximum 5 percent rate, and portfolio dividends are taxable at a maximum 15 percent rate. The treaty requires a 10 percent ownership threshold for application of the 5 percent tax rate.

The treaty provides for a maximum 10 percent rate of tax at source on most interest payments. Interest earned on trade credits, and on government debt, including debt guaranteed by government agencies (e.g., the U.S. Export-Import Bank) is exempt from tax at source.

Royalties for the use of industrial, commercial or scientific equipment are subject to a 5 percent tax at source. All other royalties (including payments for the use of software, other than off-the-shelf software) are taxed at a maximum rate of 10 percent.

Consistent with the U.S. and OECD Models, the treaty provides generally for the taxation by one State of the business profits of a resident of the other only when such profits are attributable to a permanent establishment located in that other State. The treaty, however, includes an anti-abuse rule that would allow the source state to tax sales or activities performed by the enterprise outside the United States as if they were performed by a permanent establishment if it is ascertained that such activities were structured with the intention to avoid taxation in the State where the permanent establishment is situated.

The treaty, consistent with current U.S. treaty policy, provides for exclusive residence-country taxation of profits from international carriage by aircraft and ships. This reciprocal exemption also extends to income from the rental of aircraft, ships and containers if the rental activity is incidental to the operation of aircraft and ships by the lessor in international traffic. However, income from the international rental of ships and aircraft that are non-incidental to operation of ships and aircrafts is taxed at a 5 percent rate as a royalty paid for the rental of equipment.

Income from the use or rental of containers that is non-incidental to the operation of ships or aircraft in international traffic is treated as other income. Therefore, non-incidental leasing of containers by U.S. businesses is taxable only in the United States.

The treaty contains a reciprocal agreement, found in several U.S. treaties, particularly those with our North Sea partners, that the income from the exploration or exploitation of the seabed and sub-soil is taxable by the source State if the activities are carried on for more than 30 days in any twelve month period. Wages, salaries and similar remuneration paid to those whose employment is derived from such activities can be taxed in the state where the offshore activities occur if such activities exceed the 30 day threshold. However, that same remuneration can be taxed only in the non-source State if the period of activity does not exceed 30 days and the employer is not a resident of the source State. If the wages, salaries or other remuneration are derived from the transportation of supplies or from other activities (such as tugboats) auxiliary to the exploration and exploitation then that remuneration can be taxed only in the country of which the employer is resident.

The taxation of income from the performance of personal services under the treaty is generally similar to that under the U.S. Model, but, like some U.S. treaties with developing countries, it grants a taxing right to the host country with respect to certain categories of personal services income that is somewhat broader than in the OECD or U.S. Model.

The limitation on benefits rules of the treaty are similar to those found in the U.S. Model and in all recent U.S. treaties.

The information exchange provisions generally follow the U.S. Model and make clear that Lithuania is obligated to provide U.S. tax officials such information as is necessary to carry out the provisions of the treaty.

The treaty provides a U.S. foreign tax credit for the Lithuanian income taxes covered by the treaty, and a Lithuanian foreign tax credit for the U.S. income taxes covered by the treaty.

The treaty will enter into force after each State has notified the other that it has completed its ratification requirements. It will have effect, with respect to taxes withheld at the source, for amounts paid or credited on or after the first day of January of the calendar year next following the year in which the treaty enters into force. In other cases the treaty will have effect with respect to taxable years beginning on or after the first day of January of the calendar year next following the year in which the treaty enters into force.

The treaty will remain in force indefinitely unless terminated by one of the Contracting States. Either State will be able to terminate the treaty at the end of any calendar year by giving written notice at least six months before the end of that calendar year.

Unique to this treaty and the treaties with Estonia and Latvia is an agreement that there will be a five-year period within which the appropriate authorities of the two States will meet to discuss the application of the treaty to income derived from new technologies (such as payments received for transmission by satellite, cable, optic fibre or similar technology). The meeting may result in a protocol that specifically addresses the treatys application to income from new technologies.

This concludes my remarks on the three Baltic treaties.

Venezuela

Next, I would like to tell you about the proposed treaty with Venezuela. This treaty is of special importance because it represents a crucial step towards achieving our goal of expanding our tax treaty network in Latin America. If ratified, this agreement would be the United States only tax treaty in force with a South American nation.

The proposed treaty with Venezuela generally follows the pattern of the 1996 U.S. Model, while incorporating some provisions found in recent U.S. treaties with other developing countries and in the OECD Model. The treatys rules on the taxation of investment income are an example. Although the withholding rates under the proposed treaty are generally higher than those in the U.S. Model, the rates are comparable to those found in other U.S. tax treaties with developing countries and those in other tax treaties of Venezuela. Also, the withholding rates reflect Venezuelas territorial system of taxation and the policy objective of establishing an adequate single level of tax on cross-border investment income.

Under the proposed treaty, as in the U.S. Model, direct investment dividends are taxable at source at a 5 percent rate, and portfolio dividends are taxable at source at a 15 percent rate. The proposed treaty requires a 10 percent ownership threshold for application of the 5 percent direct investment tax rate. Also similar to the U.S. Model, dividends paid to a Contracting State or a governmental entity constituted and operated exclusively to administer or provide pension benefits, are exempt from withholding in the source State.

The proposed treaty provides for a 10 percent rate of tax at source on most interest payments. Interest that is received by a financial institution (including an insurance company) is subject to a lower 4.95 percent rate of tax. Interest earned on government debt, including debt guaranteed by government agencies (e.g., the U.S. Export-Import Bank, the Federal Reserve Banks and the Overseas Private Investment Corporation) is exempt from tax at source. These provisions are, in effect, a melding of the U.S. and OECD Models.

Royalties for the right to use copyrights, patents or trademarks are subject to a 10 percent tax at source. Royalties for the right to use industrial, commercial or scientific equipment are subject to a lower 5 percent rate of tax at source. Under the proposed treaty, fees for the provision of technical services and fees for technical assistance are considered business profits or personal services income, and are taxed as such, rather than as royalty payments. These latter important provisions thereby mitigate double taxation and generally limit any taxation to net rather than gross income, and then only to when a permanent establishment is created.

The taxation of capital gains under the proposed treaty follows the format of the U.S. Model. Gains and income derived from the sale of real property and from real property interests may be taxed by the State in which the property is located. Likewise, gains or income from the sale of personal property, if attributable to a fixed base or permanent establishment situated in a Contracting State, may be taxed in that State. All other gains, including gains from the sale of ships, aircraft and containers, and gains from the sale of stock in a corporation, are taxable only in the State of residence of the seller.

Regarding the taxation of business income, as with the U.S. and OECD Models, the proposed treaty provides generally for the taxation by one State of the business profits of a resident of the other only when such profits are attributable to a permanent establishment located in that other State. Under the proposed treaty, the taxation of income from the operation of ships and aircraft in international traffic and from the use, maintenance or rental of containers used in international traffic is fully consistent with the U.S. Model.

The taxation of income from the performance of personal services under the proposed treaty is similar to that under some U.S. treaties with developing countries, but grants a taxing right to the host country with respect to such income that is broader than in the OECD or U.S. Model.

The limitation on benefits provisions of the proposed treaty are similar to those found in the U.S. Model and in all recent U.S. treaties, with minor modifications necessary because of Venezuelas territorial tax system.

The information exchange provisions generally follow the U.S. Model and make clear that Venezuela is obligated to provide U.S. tax officials such information as is necessary to carry out the provisions of the treaty.

The proposed treaty provides a U.S. foreign tax credit for Venezuelan income taxes subject to the limitations imposed by U.S. internal law on the granting of foreign tax credits. Similarly, Venezuela shall, under the proposed Convention, provide relief against double taxation to Venezuelan taxpayers who are also subject to U.S. income tax, subject to the limitations imposed by Venezuelan law.

The proposed treaty will enter into force when each Contracting State has notified the other that the domestic requirements needed for entry into force have been completed. It will have effect, with respect to taxes withheld at source, for amounts paid or credited on or after January 1 of the year following the date on which the treaty enters into force. In other cases the treaty will have effect with respect to taxable periods beginning on or after January 1 of the year following the date on which the treaty enters into force.

I know that the Committee has been alerted to a pending change in Venezuelas income tax law, through which Venezuela will begin taxing all of the income received by its residents, rather than only that income that was determined, under broad rules, to be connected to Venezuela. The possibility that Venezuela would adopt this system was present throughout our treaty negotiations, and we planned for it in drafting the treaty. And while more time with the new law may provide us with more opportunity to analyze its provisions, we believe that the analysis we have performed is adequate to allow us to determine that the treaty is at least as appropriate under the new law as it would have been under the old law, and likely more so. We believe that the treaty works appropriately, in large part because this change from territorial to worldwide taxation brings Venezuelas domestic laws into closer conformity with international norms. The increased possibilities for double taxation that are the natural result of this change make the treaty that much more important than it was when Venezuela had a territorial system. And the vestiges of Venezuelas territorial system are also addressed by special provisions in the treaty included to deal with that system. On balance, we believe we can recommend that the Committee approve the treaty despite this change in Venezuelas law.

Slovenia

The United States does not currently have an income tax treaty with Slovenia. Slovenia will be the first country in the area of the former Yugoslavia with which we will have concluded a tax treaty. It is the most economically advanced country in the former Yugoslavia and is in the first wave of applicants to the European Union from Central and Eastern Europe. We expect that the conclusion of the tax treaty will be an important element in expanding trade and investment between the United States and Slovenia.

The proposed income tax treaty with the Republic of Slovenia generally follows the pattern of the U.S. Model, while incorporating some provisions found in the OECD Model. The proposed treaty establishes maximum rates of source country tax on cross-border payments of dividends, interest, and royalties. The withholding rates on investment income in the proposed treaty are generally consistent with those found in U.S. treaties with OECD member countries.

Dividends may be subject to tax at source at a maximum rate of 15 percent, except when paid to a corporation in the other country that owns at least 25 percent of the paying corporation, in which case the maximum rate is 5 percent.

The maximum rate of withholding tax at source on interest under the proposed treaty is 5 percent. However, interest received, guaranteed, or insured by the Government of either Contracting State or the central bank of either Contracting State and interest with respect to a deferred payment for personal property or services is exempt from withholding at source.

Royalties are generally subject to tax at source at a rate not to exceed 5 percent.

The taxation of capital gains under the proposed treaty follows the format of the U.S. Model. Gains and income derived from the sale of real property and from real property interests may be taxed in the State in which the property is located. Likewise, gains or income from the sale of personal property, if attributable to a fixed base or permanent establishment situated in a Contracting State, may be taxed in that State. All other gains, including gains from the sale of ships, aircraft and containers, and stock in a corporation, are taxable only in the State of residence of the seller.

As with the U.S. and OECD Models, the proposed treaty provides generally for the taxation by one State of the business profits of a resident of the other only when such profits are attributable to a permanent establishment located in that other State. Under the proposed treaty, the taxation of income from the operation of ships and aircraft in international traffic and from the use, maintenance or rental of containers used in international traffic is fully consistent with the U.S. Model.

The taxation of income from the performance of personal services under the proposed treaty generally follows standard U.S. treaty policy. The taxation of income from dependent personal services or of income derived by corporate directors, by athletes, or by entertainers is essentially the same as in other recent U.S. treaties. The dollar threshold for the taxation of athletes and entertainers is slightly lower than in the U.S. Model to reflect the lower average income level in Slovenia.

The treaty provides for host-country exemption for students for up to five years with respect to certain types of income. These exempted categories of income include support payments from abroad, grants and awards, and up to $5,000 of annual income from personal services in the host state. Business trainees temporarily present in the host State are exempted from tax for up to 12 months with respect to income from personal services not exceeding $8,000. Visiting professors and researchers at recognized educational or research institutions are exempt from host-country taxation for a period not exceeding two years from the date of first arrival.

The proposed treaty contains comprehensive rules in its Limitation on Benefits article, designed to deny treaty-shoppers the benefits of the treaty. In addition, the treaty contains new provisions aimed at preventing abuse with respect to specific transactions. Under these provisions, a person otherwise entitled to treaty benefits will be denied those benefits if the main purpose, or one of the main purposes, of the creation or assignment of the rights giving rise to the income was to take advantage of the treaty. These provisions apply with respect to the Articles regarding Dividends, Interest, Royalties, and Other Income. It is expected that the United States will incorporate these new anti-abuse provisions into its Model.

The information exchange provisions generally follow the U.S. Model and make clear that each State is obligated to provide tax officials of the other State such information as is necessary to carry out the provisions of the treaty. Slovenia has confirmed to us that it has no bank secrecy or other rules that would prevent such exchange from taking place.

The proposed treaty provides a U.S. foreign tax credit for Slovenian income taxes subject to the limitations imposed by U.S. internal law on the granting of foreign tax credits. Similarly, Slovenia shall, under the proposed treaty, provide relief against double taxation to Slovenian taxpayers who are also subject to U.S. income tax, subject to the limitations imposed by Slovenian law.

Also included in the proposed treaty are rules necessary for administering the treaty, including rules for the resolution of disputes under the treaty.

The proposed treaty will enter into force upon the exchange of instruments of ratification. It will have effect with respect to taxes withheld at source for payments made or credited on or after the first day of the third month next following the date the treaty enters into force, and with respect to other taxes, for taxable years beginning on or after the first day of January next following the date of entry into force.

Denmark

I'd like to turn now to the proposed treaty and protocol with Denmark. This proposed treaty would replace the existing convention, our oldest income tax treaty, which was signed in 1948. The new treaty generally follows the pattern of the OECD Model and of recent U.S. treaties with other developed countries.

First, with regard to the taxation of investment income, the withholding tax rates under the proposed treaty are the same as those in the U.S. Model. Direct investment dividends are subject to withholding tax at source at a maximum 5 percent rate and portfolio dividends are taxable at a maximum 15 percent rate. The proposed treaty requires a 10 percent ownership threshold for application of the 5 percent tax rate. This ownership threshold is reduced from the 95 percent threshold required under the existing treaty. As under the existing treaty, interest and royalty payments are generally exempt from tax in the source country under the proposed treaty. These limitations on taxation by the source country do not apply if the beneficial owner of the income is a resident of a Contracting State that carries on business in the other Contracting State in which the income arises and, in the case of business profits, the income is attributable to a permanent establishment or, in the case of independent personal services, to a fixed base in that other State.

The taxation of capital gains under the proposed treaty generally follows the format of the U.S. Model. Gains from the sale of real property and from real property interests may be taxed by the country in which the property is located. Likewise, gains from the sale of personal property forming part of a fixed base or permanent establishment situated in a contracting State may be taxed in that State. All other gains, including gains from the alienation of ships, boats, aircraft and containers used in international traffic and gains from the sale of corporate stock are taxable only in the sellers residence State. As a variation from the rules under the current treaty and the U.S. Model, gains of an enterprise of one Contracting State from the deemed alienation of an installation, drilling rig or ship used in the other State for the exploration or exploitation of oil and gas resources may be taxed in that other State in accordance with its law, but only to the extent of any depreciation taken in that other State. In order to minimize possible double taxation that could otherwise arise, the treaty allows adjustments to the timing of the taxation of capital gains.

As with the existing treaty, recent U.S. treaties and the OECD Model, the proposed treaty provides generally for the taxation by one State of the business profits of a resident of the other only when such profits are attributable to a permanent establishment located in that other State.

In addition, the proposed treaty preserves the U.S. right to impose its branch tax on U.S. branches of Danish corporations. This tax is not imposed under the existing treaty.

Consistent with the U.S. Model, the proposed treaty permits only the country of residence to tax profits from the international operation of ships or aircraft and income from the use, maintenance or rental of containers used in international traffic. This reciprocal exemption extends to income from the rental on a full basis of ships and aircraft and, if the ships or aircraft are operated in international traffic by the lessee or the income is incidental to income from the operation of ships or aircraft in international traffic, to income from the rental on a bareboat basis of ships and aircraft. The exemption under the proposed treaty is broader in scope than under the existing treaty.

The proposed treaty clarifies the treatment of the profits of the Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS) by treating it as a consortium that is eligible for the exemption from taxation in the source State to the extent of the participation of the Danish member of SAS, SAS Danmark A/S.

The taxation of income from the performance of personal services under the proposed treaty generally follows U.S. standard treaty policy. The rules for the taxation of pension income vary from the rules found in the existing treaty and the U.S. Model by providing for taxation only in the source State, subject to an exception for persons currently receiving pensions, who will continue to be taxed only in the country of residence.

The limitation on benefits provisions of the proposed treaty are similar to those found in the U.S. Model and recent U.S. treaties, with modifications to take account of certain types of entities found only in Denmark.

The proposed treaty provides a foreign tax credit for certain taxes imposed under the Danish Hydrocarbon Tax Act, subject to the same type of limitation that is found in other tax treaties with countries on the North Sea.

Also included in the proposed treaty are the rules necessary for administering the treaty, including rules for the resolution of disputes under the treaty and the exchange of information. The exchange of information provisions of the proposed treaty generally follow the U.S. Model. Our experience on exchange of information with Denmark is positive. As under the existing treaty, the proposed treaty contains a provision for assistance in the collection of taxes.

The proposed treaty will enter into force when the Governments notify each other that their requirements for entry into force have been met. It will have effect, with respect to taxes withheld at source, for amounts paid or credited on or after the first day of the second month next following the date on which the treaty enters into force; with respect to other taxes, the treaty will take effect for taxable periods beginning on or after the first day of January next following the date on which the treaty enters into force. Where the existing treaty would have provided greater relief from tax than the proposed treaty, the existing treaty will continue to have affect for an additional year at the election of any person that was entitled to benefits under the current treaty. The proposed treaty will remain in force indefinitely unless terminated by one of the Contracting States by giving prior notice through diplomatic channels.

Italy

The proposed new treaty and protocol with Italy would replace the existing treaty, which was signed in 1984. The proposed treaty generally follows the pattern of the OECD Model and other recent United States treaties with developed countries. The proposed treaty is of great importance to the U.S. business community because it addresses a new Italian regional tax on productive activities and generally lowers the withholding rates imposed by each country on passive investment income.

The proposed treaty addresses the replacement of the Italian local income tax by the new Italian regional tax on productive activities (IRAP). Because IRAP is calculated without an allowance for labor costs and, for certain taxpayers, without an allowance for interest costs, it raises the issue of potential double taxation. By providing a U.S. tax credit for a portion of IRAP, the proposed treaty resolves this issue. A formula is provided in the proposed treaty for calculating the creditable portion. Only the creditable portion of IRAP is considered to be a covered tax under the proposed treaty.

The proposed treaty establishes maximum rates of source country tax on cross-border payments of dividends, interest, and royalties that are generally lower than those in the existing treaty.

Under the proposed treaty, dividends may be subject to tax at source at a maximum rate of 15 percent, except when paid to a corporation in the other country that owns at least 25 percent of the paying corporation, in which case the maximum rate is 5 percent. Under the existing treaty, the 5 percent rate is available only if the receiving corporation owns more than 50 percent of the stock or capital of the paying corporation, while a 10 percent rate applies if the receiving corporation owns between 10 and 50 percent of the paying corporation, and a 15 percent maximum rate applies in all other cases. While the maximum rate applicable to those corporate taxpayers owning at least 10 percent and less than 25 percent of the paying corporation will increase from 10 percent to 15 percent under the proposed treaty, the maximum rate for those owning between 25 percent and 50 percent of the paying corporation, including the significant group of taxpayers who own exactly 50 percent, will decrease from 10 percent to 5 percent.

The proposed treaty lowers the maximum rate of withholding tax at source on interest to 10 percent from the 15 percent rate in the existing treaty. As in the existing treaty, the proposed treaty provides an exemption from withholding at source for interest received, guaranteed, or insured by the Government of either Contracting State (although, in order for interest received by a qualified governmental entity to be eligible for this exemption, the qualified governmental entity must hold less than 25 percent of the capital of the person paying the interest). The proposed treaty also exempts from withholding at source interest with respect to credit sales between enterprises and credit sales of industrial, commercial, or scientific equipment.

The proposed treaty lowers the maximum rates of withholding tax at source for royalty payments compared to the rates in the existing treaty. Under the proposed treaty, royalties for literary copyrights are exempt from tax at source. The maximum rate for royalties for the use of computer software or for the rental of industrial, commercial, or scientific equipment is 5 percent, and the maximum rate for all other royalties is 8 percent. In contrast, under the existing treaty the maximum rate for royalties for literary copyrights is 5 percent, the maximum rate for royalties for the rental of tangible personal property is 7 percent, the maximum rate for royalties for motion pictures and films is 8 percent, and the maximum rate for all other royalties is 10 percent. Thus, although the proposed treaty does not reflect the U.S. Model position of exemption at source for software and rentals of tangible personal property, the proposed treaty reduces the rates of withholding as compared to the existing treaty.

The taxation of capital gains under the proposed treaty follows the format of the existing treaty. Gains and income derived from the sale of real property and from real property interests may be taxed in the State in which the property is located. Likewise, gains or income from the sale of personal property, if attributable to a fixed base or permanent establishment situated in a Contracting State, may be taxed in that State. As in the existing treaty, but unlike the U.S. Model, non-incidental gains from the alienation of ships and aircraft rented on a bareboat basis and attributable to a permanent establishment situated in a Contracting State may be taxed in that State. All other gains, including gains from the alienation of containers, gains from the alienation of ships and aircraft rented on a full basis, incidental gains from the alienation of ships and aircraft rented on a bareboat basis, and gains from the sale of stock in a corporation, are taxable only in the State of residence of the seller.

As with the U.S. and OECD Models, the proposed treaty provides generally for the taxation by one State of the business profits of a resident of the other only when such profits are attributable to a permanent establishment located in that other State.

As under the U.S. Model, all income from the use, maintenance or rental of containers used in international traffic is exempt from source-country taxation under the proposed treaty. Also, the proposed treaty provides for exclusive residence-country taxation of profits from the international operation of ships or aircraft, including the rental of ships and aircraft on a full basis and, when the rental is incidental to the operation of ships or aircraft by the lessor, rentals of ships and aircraft on a bareboat basis. Like the existing treaty, but unlike the U.S. Model, income from the rental of ships and aircraft on a bareboat basis that is not incidental to the operation of ships or aircraft by the lessor and that is attributable to a permanent establishment situated in a Contracting State may be taxed in that State.

Unlike the existing treaty, the taxation of income from the performance of personal services under the proposed treaty generally follows standard U.S. treaty policy. Consistent with the U.S. Model, the proposed treaty eliminates a provision of the existing treaty that allows the source State to tax an individual performing independent personal services if that individual has been present in that State for more than 183 days during the year, even if that person does not have a fixed base regularly available to him.

The limitation on benefits provisions of the proposed treaty are similar to those found in the U.S. Model and in all recent U.S. treaties, and are more comprehensive than those found in the existing treaty.

In addition, the treaty contains new provisions aimed at preventing abuse with respect to specific transactions. Under these provisions, a person otherwise entitled to treaty benefits will be denied those benefits if the main purpose, or one of the main purposes, of the creation or assignment of the rights giving rise to the income was to take advantage of the treaty. These provisions apply with respect to the Articles regarding Dividends, Interest, Royalties, and Other Income. It is expected that the United States will incorporate these new anti-abuse provisions into its Model.

The information exchange provisions are similar to those in the existing treaty and make clear that each State is obligated to provide tax officials of the other State such information as is necessary to carry out the provisions of the treaty. Italy has confirmed to us that it has no bank secrecy or other rules that would prevent such exchange from taking place.

Finally, the proposed treaty includes modernized rules necessary for administering the treaty, including rules for the resolution of disputes under the treaty. These provisions now conform to the OECD Model, which should improve the functioning of the mutual agreement process. They include the use of arbitration to resolve disputes that may arise between the Contracting States. However, the arbitration process may be implemented under the treaty only after the two Contracting State have agreed to do so through an exchange of diplomatic notes. Once implemented, a particular case may be assigned to an arbitration panel only with the consent of all the parties to the case.

The proposed treaty will enter into force upon the exchange of instruments of ratification. It will have effect with respect to taxes withheld at source for payments made or credited on or after the first day of the second month next following the date the treaty enters into force, and with respect to other taxes, for taxable years beginning on or after the first day of January next following the date of entry into force. In the event that a person would have been entitled to greater relief under the existing treaty, that person may elect to continue to apply the existing treaty for a twelve-month period from the date on which the proposed treaty would otherwise have effect. The proposed treaty will remain in force indefinitely unless terminated by one of the Contracting States. Either State may terminate the proposed treaty at any time after 5 years from the date on which the proposed treaty enters into force by giving at least six months prior notice through diplomatic channels.

Estate Tax Protocol with Germany

The proposed protocol amends the estate, inheritance and gift tax treaty between the United States and Germany, which was signed in 1980 and entered into force in 1986. In 1988, the United States amended its estate tax law in a way that increased estate taxes in the case of deceased U.S. citizens who were married to non-citizens.

Although the U.S. rejected claims by estate tax treaty partners that the 1988 change violated treaty nondiscrimination clauses, we indicated our willingness to amend our estate tax treaties with certain treaty partners to provide relief to surviving noncitizen spouses in appropriate cases. In particular, the proposed protocol eases the impact of the 1988 provisions upon certain estates of limited value. The United States, in a 1995 protocol to the U.S.-Canada income tax treaty, provided similar relief to certain estates of limited value involving Canadians. The United States willingness to enter into the proposed protocol was a significant factor in Germanys ratification of the current U.S.-Germany income tax treaty, which was signed in 1989.

The proposed protocol also provides a pro rata unified credit to the estate of a German domiciliary for purposes of computing the U.S. estate tax. Under this provision, a German domiciliary is allowed a credit against U.S. estate tax ranging from the amount ordinarily allowed to the estate of a nonresident under the Code ($13,000) to the amount of credit allowed to the estate of a U.S. citizen under the Code ($202,050 in 1998), based on the extent to which the assets of the estate are situated in the United States. Congress anticipated the negotiation of such pro rata unified credits in Internal Revenue Code section 2102(c)(3)(A), and a similar credit was included in the 1995 U.S.-Canada income tax protocol.

The proposed protocol also makes other changes to the Convention to reflect more closely current U.S. treaty policy. For example, the proposed protocol extends the period of time during which a citizen of one country can be domiciled in the other country without becoming subject to the primary taxing jurisdiction of the other country. Such a provision is increasingly important to peripatetic business executives. The proposed protocol also extends the United States ability to tax former citizens and long-term residents to conform with 1996 legislative changes to the Internal Revenue Code.

**Agreements dealing with Taxation of Dividends from REITS **In 1997, the Senate approved three treaties, with Austria, Ireland and Switzerland, subject to the understanding that the Treasury Department would use its best efforts to negotiate agreements that would modify those treaties treatment of dividends paid by Real Estate Investment Trusts. The agreements with Austria and Switzerland are in an advanced stage of negotiation, but have not yet been completed. However, the agreement with Ireland was signed on September 24, 1999. Although it is not yet pending before the Committee, we hope that, if the President transmits it to the Senate in time, the Committee will consider it at the same time as the rest of the treaties as the agreement does nothing other than respond to the Senates 1997 understanding.** Treaties under Negotiation **We continue to maintain an active calendar of tax treaty negotiations. We are in active negotiations with Canada, Korea, the United Kingdom and Chile. We expect to announce the start of negotiations with several other countries soon. In accordance with the treaty program priorities noted earlier, we continue to seek appropriate opportunities for tax treaty discussions and negotiations with several countries in Latin America and in the developing world generally.** Conclusion**Let me conclude by again thanking the Committee for its continuing interest in the tax treaty program, and for devoting the time of Members and staff to undertake a meaningful review of the agreements that are pending before you. We appreciate your efforts this year and in past years to bring the treaties before this Committee and then to the full Senate for its advice and consent to ratification. We also appreciate the assistance and cooperation of the staffs of this Committee and of the Joint Committee on Taxation in the tax treaty process. With your and their help, we have, since the beginning of 1993, brought into force 22 new treaties and protocols, not counting the eight agreements presently being considered.

We urge the Committee to take prompt and favorable action on all of the Conventions and Protocols before you today. Such action will send an important message to our trading partners and our business community. It will demonstrate our desire to expand the United States treaty network with income tax treaties formulated to enhance the worldwide competitiveness of United States companies. It will strengthen and expand our economic relations with countries that have seen significant economic and political changes in recent years. It will make clear our intention to deal bilaterally in a forceful and realistic way with treaty abuse. Finally, it will enable us to improve the administration of our tax laws both domestically and internationally.

I will be glad to answer any questions you might have.
