---
title: WEEKLY RELEASE OF U.S. RESERVE ASSETS
date: 1999-11-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls246
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-246

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the week ending November 12, 1999.

As this table indicates, U.S. reserve assets totaled $72,275 million as of November 12, 1999, as compared with $72,367 million as of November 12, 1999.

 

U.S. Reserve Assets

(millions of U.S. dollars)

**Week Ending Total Reserve Assets Gold Stock Special Drawing Rights   Foreign Currencies** ESF      SOMA** Reserve Position in IMF** November 5, 1999**72,367**

11,047

10,429

15,936

15,939

19,016

November 12, 1999

**72,275**

11,047

*10,375*

15,966

15,969

*18,918*   **Notes:  Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of September 30, 1999. The August 31, 1999 value was $11,046 million.** is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of September 30, 1999. The August 31, 1999 value was $11,046 million.** Special Drawing Rights (SDR) holdings and the Reserve Position in the IMF are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for November 5, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of November 12, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the November 5, 1999 IMF data.**(SDR) holdings and the are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for November 5, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of November 12, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the November 5, 1999 IMF data.** Foreign Currencies includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account ( SOMA). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.** includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund () and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.
