---
title: WEEKLY RELEASE OF U.S. RESERVE ASSETS
date: 1999-11-03
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls203
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-203

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the week ending October 29, 1999.

As this table indicates, U.S. reserve assets totaled $73,209 million as of October 29, 1999, down from $73,775 million as of October 22, 1999.

 

U.S. Reserve Assets

(millions of U.S. dollars)

**Week Ending Total Reserve Assets Gold Stock Special Drawing Rights   Foreign Currencies** ESF      SOMA** Reserve Position in IMF** October 15, 1999**73,775**

11,046

10,290

16,338

16,341

19,759

October 22, 1999

**73,209**

11,046

*10,232*

16,187

16,190

*19,554*   **Notes:  Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of August 31, 1999. The July 31, 1999 value was $11,048 million.** is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of August 31, 1999. The July 31, 1999 value was $11,048 million.** Special Drawing Rights (SDR) holdings and the Reserve Position in the IMF are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for October 22, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of October 29, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the October 22, 1999 IMFdata.** (SDR) holdings and the are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for October 22, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of October 29, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the October 22, 1999 IMFdata.** Foreign Currencies includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account ( SOMA). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.** includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund () and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.
