---
title: Weekly Release of U.S. Reserve Assets
date: 1999-06-22
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr3215
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the week ending June 18, 1999.

As this table indicates, U.S. reserve assets totaled $72,087 million as of June 18, 1999, down from $72,739 million as of June 4.

 

U.S. Reserve Assets

(millions of U.S. dollars)

**Week Ending Total Reserve Assets Gold Stock Special Drawing Rights   Foreign Currencies** ESF      SOMA **Reserve Position in IMF** June 11, 1999 **72,739**

11,049

9,796

15,047

15,049

21,798

June 18, 1999

**72,087**

11,049

*9,750*

14,795

14,796

*21,696*   **Notes:  Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of April 30, 1999. The March 31, 1999 value was $11,049 million.** is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of April 30, 1999. The March 31, 1999 value was $11,049 million. **Special Drawing Rights (SDR) holdings and the Reserve Position in the IMF are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for June 11, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of June 18, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the June 11, 1999 IMF data.** (SDR) holdings and the are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for June 11, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of June 18, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the June 11, 1999 IMF data. **Foreign Currencies includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account ( SOMA). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.** includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund () and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.
