---
title: Weekly Release of U.S. Reserve Assets
date: 1999-03-23
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr3037
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the week ending March 19, 1999.

As indicated in this table, U.S. reserve assets totaled $74,988 million as of March 19, 1999, up from $74,639 million as of March 12, 1999.

 

U.S. Reserve Assets(millions of U.S. dollars)

**Week Ending Total Reserve Assets Gold Stock Special Drawing Rights   Foreign Currencies **ESF SOMA** Reserve Position in IMF **March 12, 1999** 74,639**

11,047

9,846

11,861

18,556

23,329

March 19, 1999

**74,988**

11,047

*9,826*

15,352

15,337

*23,427*   **Notes: Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of February 28, 1999. The January 31, 1999 value was $11,048 million.** is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of February 28, 1999. The January 31, 1999 value was $11,048 million.**Special Drawing Rights (SDR) holdings and the Reserve Position in the IMF are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for March 12, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of March 19, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the March 12, 1999 IMF data.**(SDR) holdings and the are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for March 12, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of March 19, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the March 12, 1999 IMF data.**Foreign Currencies includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account ( SOMA). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.** includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund () and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.

The increase in the foreign currency assets of the ESF and decrease in the foreign currency assets of the SOMA reflect a transaction between the two during the week ended March 19, 1999 to even out their respective foreign currency holdings.
