---
title: WEEKLY RELEASE OF U.S. RESERVE ASSETS
date: 1999-10-06
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls142
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-142

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the week ending October 1, 1999.

As this table indicates, U.S. reserve assets totaled $ 73,032 million as of October 1, 1999, as compared to $73,461 million as of September 24, 1999.

 

U.S. Reserve Assets

(millions of U.S. dollars)

**Week Ending Total Reserve Assets Gold Stock Special Drawing Rights   Foreign Currencies **ESF      SOMA** Reserve Position in IMF **September 24, 1999** 73,461**

11,046

10,249

16,155

16,158

19,852

October 1, 1999

**73,032**

11,046

*10,306*

15,857

15,860

*19,964*   **Notes:  Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of August 31, 1999. The July 31, 1999 value was $11,048 million.** is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of August 31, 1999. The July 31, 1999 value was $11,048 million.**Special Drawing Rights (SDR) holdings and the Reserve Position in the IMF are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for September 24, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of October 1, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the September 24, 1999 IMF data.**(SDR) holdings and the are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for September 24, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of October 1, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the September 24, 1999 IMF data.**Foreign Currencies includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account ( SOMA). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.** includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund () and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.
