---
title: SECRETARY RUBIN ANNOUNCES NEW SECRET SERVICE HEAD
date: 1999-03-04
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr3000
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin on Thursday administered the oath of office to the 20th Director of the Secret Service, Brian L. Stafford.  Brian has distinguished himself and the Secret Service through his professionalism, integrity and commitment to duty, Secretary Rubin said. As we look ahead, the Secret Service will remain keenly focused on all threats falling within its jurisdiction -- around the world, within the United States and right here around the White House complex.  Stafford, who has been in the Secret Service for 28 years, currently serves as the Assistant Director of the Office of Protective Operations. Before that, he was the Special Agent in Charge of the Presidential Protective Division from February 1997 until February 1998. Stafford began his tenure with the Secret Service as a special agent assigned to the Cleveland Field Office. He also served in a variety of other capacities with the Secret Service including; the Assistant to the Special Agent in Charge of the Presidential Protective Division, and the Assistant Special Agent in Charge of the Office of Protective Operations, the Special Investigations and Security Division, the Technical Security Division, and the Miami Field Office. Prior to his tenure with the Secret Service, Stafford served in the United States Army from 1969 to 1971 and completed a tour of duty in Vietnam.  Stafford, a graduate of Mount Union College in Ohio and a native of Sharpsville, Penn. , was born in 1948, and has received numerous achievement and performance awards throughout his distinguished law enforcement career. Stafford replaces former Secret Service Director Lewis C. Merletti who retired in January.**
