---
title: WEEKLY RELEASE OF U.S. RESERVE ASSETS
date: 1999-08-17
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls61
---
*(Archived Content)*



FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-61


  

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the week ending August 13, 1999.



As this table indicates, U.S. reserve assets totaled $72,034 million as of August 13, 1999, down from $72,583 million as of August 6, 1999

  

U.S. Reserve Assets



(millions of U.S. dollars)

**Week Ending** **Total Reserve Assets** **Gold Stock** **Special Drawing Rights** **  Foreign Currencies**   ESF      SOMA **Reserve Position in IMF** 

August 6, 1999

**72,583** 

11,046



10,148



15,497



15,496



20,396



August 13, 1999

**72,034** 

11,046

*10,104* 

15,288



15,288

*20,308*   **Notes: ****Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of June 30, 1999. The May 31, 1999 value was $11,049 million. **is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of June 30, 1999. The May 31, 1999 value was $11,049 million. **Special Drawing Rights (SDR) holdings and the Reserve Position in the IMF are based on IMF data and valued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for August 6, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of August 13, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the August 6, 1999 IMF data. **(SDR) holdings and the are based on IMF data and valued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for August 6, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of August 13, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the August 6, 1999 IMF data. **Foreign Currencies includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account ( SOMA). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions. **includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund () and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.
