---
title: TREASURY DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY (GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL POLICY) LEWIS A. SACHS HOUSE SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE POSTAL SERVICE
date: 1999-03-04
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2998
---
*(Archived Content)*

  Chairman McHugh and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to have the opportunity to submit this written statement on behalf of the Treasury Department with respect to H.R. 22, the Postal Modernization Act of 1999. 

The financial provisions in Title II of the current version of H.R. 22 are similar to those in earlier versions of the bill, which Treasury reviewed in letters dated September 24 and April 10, 1998. These provisions would segregate the finances and operations of the Postal Service into three distinct components: (1) Non-Competitive Postal, which would continue to be financed through the existing Postal Service Fund; (2) Competitive Postal, which would be financed through a newly created Competitive Products Fund in the Treasury; and (3) Non- Postal, which would be financed by a newly created corporation, the shares of which would be owned by the Competitive Products Fund.



The current bill includes new provisions designed to strengthen the proposed fire walls between the three proposed Postal Service components and to minimize the risks posed by the Competitive Products Fund. For example, under the bill, the proposed Competitive Products Fund would no longer be authorized to borrow from the Postal Service Fund. In addition, the Postal Service would be required to submit to the Secretary of the Treasury and the proposed new Postal Regulatory Commission an annual report that would address such matters as risk limitations, reserve balances, allocations of monies, liquidity requirements, and measures to safeguard against losses.



While we support the new provisions and appreciate the Subcommittee's efforts to address Treasury's concerns, we continue to object to the financial provisions in Title II of the bill. Our concerns are as follows:


- Borrowing. H.R. 22 would permit the Postal Service to borrow money for its Competitive Products Fund from the market, rather than continuing to borrow from the Federal Financing Bank (FFB). We object to this provision because we believe it would result in increased borrowing costs to the Postal Service. In accordance with longstanding Federal financial policies, Federal entities, such as the Postal Service, should borrow solely from the Treasury or the FFB because that is the least expensive, most efficient method of financing such debt. In fact, we have been receiving very positive feedback from the Postal Service about its borrowing relationship with the FFB.
- Investment. The bill would permit the Postal Service to borrow on behalf of the Competitive Products Fund from the market at preferential rates due to perceived Government backing of the debt. The Competitive Products Fund could then invest any excess monies in the Non-Postal corporation; that corporation, in turn, could then invest in individual private companies. This scenario ultimately would allow the Postal Service to borrow at preferential rates and invest at potentially higher rates. Although the bill attempts to limit investment in private equities to the Non-Postal corporation, the corporation's ownership by the Competitive Products Fund and its financial links to the Postal Service create a situation in which the increased risks undertaken by the Non-Postal corporation could ultimately be borne by taxpayers.
- Banking. The bill would permit the Postal Service to deposit funds from the Competitive Products Fund outside of the Treasury, without the Secretary of the Treasury's approval. In addition, the Postal Service would be permitted to move its funds in and out of the Competitive Products Fund at its sole discretion. Under existing law, the Postal Service banks at the Treasury and may not deposit funds outside of the Treasury without the Secretary of the Treasury's approval. As a matter of sound Government fiscal policy, this arrangement is necessary to allow centralized management of the Government's cash balances. If the financial exemptions and privileges proposed for the Postal Service were to become a precedent for all Federal agencies, Treasury's borrowing costs would be increased, and its cash management and forecasting abilities would be weakened. The Postal Service provisions cannot be considered in isolation. If other Federal entities were granted similar authorities as sought for the Postal Service, the adverse consequences on Treasury's management of Government funds would be severe. Additionally, the financing costs borne by those entities would be greater.
- Non-Postal Corporation. Although the bill classifies the new Non-Postal corporation as a private corporation, we view that entity as an on-budget Federal agency. As such, it should be required to borrow, bank, and invest with the Treasury and should be subject to the Federal oversight and regulations that govern such agencies. The Non-Postal corporation should be viewed as a Federal agency because it would be solely owned by the Competitive Products Fund, and thereby, would have strong links to the Postal Service, which is a Government entity. (Non- Governmental ownership is not contemplated for the corporation.) Moreover, the Non- Postal corporation would have a Federal charter and would be authorized to conduct postal business, which is perceived as a Governmental function.


In conclusion, Treasury cannot support the financial provisions in Title II of H.R. 22, as they are currently drafted. However, we look forward to working closely with the Subcommittee and the Postal Service to find ways to resolve our concerns with these provisions.



The Office of Management and Budget has advised that there is no objection from the standpoint of the Administration's program to the presentation of this statement.
