---
title: TREASURY ASSISTANT SECRETARY (TAX POLICY) DONALD C. LUBICK REMARKS BEFORE THE HOUSE WAYS AND MEANS OVERSIGHT SUBCOMMITTEE
date: 1999-01-25
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/200242316424125675
---
*(Archived Content)*

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee:   

I am pleased to discuss the current tax incentives for the domestic production of oil and gas.



The importance of maintaining a strong domestic energy industry has been long recognized and the Internal Revenue Code includes a variety of measures to stimulate domestic exploration and production. The tax incentives contained in present law address the drop in domestic exploratory drilling that has occurred since the mid-1950s and the continuing loss of production from mature fields and marginal properties.



The current tax incentives for oil and gas are intended to encourage exploration and production. They are generally justified on the ground that they reduce vulnerability to an oil supply disruption through increases in production, reserves, and exploration and production capacity. U.S. vulnerability to oil supply disruptions also has been reduced by the growth of oil production outside the Middle East, the establishment of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, and measures that promote energy conservation and alternative energy sources.



Before I turn to my discussion of the present tax treatment of oil and gas activities, I would like to provide a brief overview of this sector.



**Overview**



Oil is an internationally traded commodity with its domestic price set by world supply and demand. Domestic exploration and production activity is affected by the world price of crude oil. Historically, world oil prices have fluctuated substantially. From 1970 to the early 1980s, there was a fivefold increase in real oil prices.



World oil prices were relatively more stable from 1986 through 1997. During that period, average refiner acquisition prices ranged from $14.76 to $23.25 in real 1992 dollars. In the last year, however, oil prices declined to about $13.50 at the refiner, their lowest level in 25 years in real terms, and they are somewhat lower today.



Despite increasing oil prices in the 1970s and early 1980s, domestic oil production declined during that period, and has continued its downward trend during the more recent period of relatively stable, but generally declining, prices. From the late 1970s to the mid 1980s oil consumption in the United States declined, but in the last decade oil consumption has risen by 12 percent. The decline in oil production and increase in consumption have led to an increase in oil imports. Net crude oil imports have risen from approximately 38 percent of consumption in 1988 to 58 percent in 1998.



The fall in crude oil prices over the past year has focused attention on the economic condition of the oil and gas industry and its potential for increasing U.S. dependence on foreign oil supplies. The concern raised by the Chairman in announcing this hearing is that current tax incentives may be ill-suited to address the problems of the domestic oil and gas industry, particularly in the case of small, independent producers. In reviewing possible policy options to relieve the hardships confronting the oil and gas industry as a result of falling oil prices, the Subcommittee should consider whether additional Federal tax subsidies for the oil and gas industry can adequately address this situation or whether other measures would be more cost effective.



I would now like to discuss the tax incentives for oil and gas in more detail.



**Tax expenditures**



Preferential tax treatment is an important source of assistance provided by the Federal government to the domestic oil and gas industry. Incentives for oil and gas production in the form of tax expenditures are estimated to total $7.0 billion for fiscal years 2000 through 2004. They include the nonconventional fuels (i.e., oil produced from shale and tar sands, gas produced from geopressured brine, Devonian shale, coal seams, tight formations, or biomass, and synthetic fuel produced from coal) production credit ($3.5 billion), the enhanced oil recovery credit ($1.9 billion), the allowance of percentage depletion for independent producers and royalty owners, including increased percentage depletion for stripper wells ($1.4 billion), the exception from the passive loss limitation for working interests in oil and gas properties ($190 million), and the expensing of intangible drilling and development costs ($40 million). In addition to those tax expenditures, oil and gas activities have largely been eliminated from the alternative minimum tax. These provisions are described in detail below.



**Present law tax incentives for domestic oil and gas production**

  **A. Percentage Depletion** 

Certain costs incurred prior to drilling an oil- or gas-producing property are recovered through the depletion deduction. These include costs of acquiring the lease or other interest in the property, and geological and geophysical costs (in advance of actual drilling). Any taxpayer having an economic interest in a producing property may use the cost depletion method. Under this method, the basis recovery for a taxable year is proportional to the exhaustion of the property during the year. The cost depletion method does not permit cost recovery deductions that exceed the taxpayer's basis in the property or that are allowable on an accelerated basis. Thus, the deduction for cost depletion is not generally viewed as a tax incentive.



**Independent producers**



Independent producers and royalty owners (as contrasted to integrated oil companies) may qualify for percentage depletion. A qualifying taxpayer determines the depletion deduction for each oil or gas property under both the percentage depletion method and the cost depletion method and deducts the larger of the two amounts. Under the percentage depletion method, generally 15 percent of the taxpayer's gross income from an oil- or gas-producing property is allowed as a deduction in each taxable year. The amount deducted may not exceed 100 percent of the net income from that property in any year (the net-income limitation). Additionally, the percentage depletion deduction for all oil and gas properties may not exceed 65 percent of the taxpayer's overall taxable income (determined before such deduction and adjusted for certain loss carrybacks and trust distributions).



A taxpayer may claim percentage depletion with respect to up to 1,000 barrels of average daily production of domestic crude oil or an equivalent amount of domestic natural gas. For producers of both oil and natural gas, this limitation applies on a combined basis. All production owned by businesses under common control and members of the same family must be aggregated; each group is then treated as one producer for application of the 1,000-barrel limitation.



**Special rules for marginal wells**



Special percentage depletion provisions apply to oil and gas production from marginal properties. The statutory percentage depletion rate is increased (from the general rate of 15 percent) by one percentage point for each whole dollar that the average price of crude oil (as determined under the provisions of the nonconventional fuels production credit of section 29) for the immediately preceding calendar year is less than $20 per barrel. In no event may the rate of percentage depletion under this provision exceed 25 percent for any taxable year. The increased rate applies for the taxpayer's taxable year which immediately follows a calendar year for which the average crude oil price falls below the $20 floor. To illustrate the application of this provision, the average price of a barrel of crude oil for calendar year 1997 was $17.24; thus, the percentage depletion rate for production from marginal wells was increased by two percent (to 17 percent) for taxable years beginning in 1998. In addition, the 100-percent net-income limitation has been suspended for marginal wells for taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997, and before December 31, 2000.



Marginal production is defined for this purpose as domestic crude oil or domestic natural gas which is produced during any taxable year from a property which (1) is a stripper well property for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, or (2) is a property substantially all of the production from which during such calendar year is heavy oil (i.e., oil that has a weighted average gravity of 20 degrees API or less corrected to 60 degrees Fahrenheit). A stripper well property is any oil or gas property for which daily average production per producing oil or gas well is not more that 15 barrel equivalents in the calendar year during which the taxpayer's taxable year begins. A property qualifies as a stripper well property for a calendar year only if the wells on such property were producing during that period at their maximum efficient rate of flow.



If a taxpayer's property consists of a partial interest in one or more oil- or gas- producing wells, the determination of whether the property is a stripper well property or a heavy oil property is made with respect to total production from such wells, including the portion of total production attributable to ownership interests other than the taxpayer's. If the property satisfies the requirements of a stripper well property, then that person receives the benefits of this provision with respect to its allocable share of the production from the property for its taxable year that begins during the calendar year in which the property so qualifies.



The allowance for percentage depletion on production from marginal oil and gas properties is subject to the 1,000-barrel-per-day limitation discussed above. Unless a taxpayer elects otherwise, marginal production is given priority over other production for purposes of utilization of that limitation.



**Effect of provisions**



Because percentage depletion, unlike cost depletion, is computed without regard to the taxpayer's basis in the depletable property, cumulative depletion deductions may be far greater than the amount expended by the taxpayer to acquire or develop the property. The excess of the percentage depletion deduction over the deduction for cost depletion is generally viewed as a tax incentive.

  **B. Intangible Drilling and Development Costs** 

In general, costs that benefit future periods must be capitalized and recovered over such periods for income tax purposes, rather than being expensed in the period the costs are incurred. In addition, the uniform capitalization rules require certain direct and indirect costs allocable to property to be included in inventory or capitalized as part of the basis of such property. In general, the uniform capitalization rules apply to real and tangible personal property produced by the taxpayer or acquired for resale.



**Deduction for intangible drilling and development costs**



Special rules apply to intangible drilling and development costs (IDCs). Under these special rules, an operator (i.e., a person who holds a working or operating interest in any tract or parcel of land either as a fee owner or under a lease or any other form of contract granting working or operating rights) who pays or incurs IDCs in the development of an oil or gas property located in the United States may elect either to expense or capitalize those costs. The uniform capitalization rules do not apply to otherwise deductible IDCs.



If a taxpayer elects to expense IDCs, the amount of the IDCs is deductible as an expense in the taxable year the cost is paid or incurred. Generally, IDCs that a taxpayer elects to capitalize may be recovered through depletion or depreciation, as appropriate; or in the case of a nonproductive well (dry hole), the operator may elect to deduct the costs. In the case of an integrated oil company (i.e., a company that engages, either directly or though a related enterprise, in substantial retailing or refining activities) that has elected to expense IDCs, 30 percent of the IDCs on productive wells must be capitalized and amortized over a 60-month period.



A taxpayer that has elected to deduct IDCs may, nevertheless, elect to capitalize and amortize certain IDCs over a 60-month period beginning with the month the expenditure was paid or incurred. This rule applies on an expenditure-by-expenditure basis; that is, for any particular taxable year, a taxpayer may deduct some portion of its IDCs and capitalize the rest under this provision. This allows the taxpayer to reduce or eliminate IDC adjustments or preferences under the alternative minimum tax.



The election to deduct IDCs applies only to those IDCs associated with domestic properties. For this purpose, the United States includes certain wells drilled offshore.



**Effect of provision**



Intangible drilling costs are a major portion of the costs necessary to locate and develop oil and gas reserves. Since the benefits obtained from these expenditures are of value throughout the life of the project, these costs would be capitalized and recovered over the period of production under generally applicable accounting principles. The acceleration of the deduction for IDCs is viewed as a tax incentive.

  **C. Tax Credits** 

**Nonconventional fuels production credit**



Taxpayers that produce certain qualifying fuels from nonconventional sources are eligible for a tax credit (the section 29 credit) equal to $3 per barrel or barrel-of-oil equivalent. Fuels qualifying for the credit must be produced domestically from a well drilled, or a facility treated as placed in service, before January 1, 1993. The section 29 credit generally is available for qualified fuels sold to unrelated persons before January 1, 2003.



For purposes of the credit, qualified fuels include: (1) oil produced from shale and tar sands; (2) gas produced from geopressured brine, Devonian shale, coal seams, a tight formation, or biomass (i.e., any organic material other than oil, natural gas, or coal (or any product thereof); and (3) liquid, gaseous, or solid synthetic fuels produced from coal (including lignite), including such fuels when used as feedstocks. The amount of the credit is determined without regard to any production attributable to a property from which gas from Devonian shale, coal seams, geopressured brine, or a tight formation was produced in marketable quantities before 1980.



The amount of the section 29 credit generally is adjusted by an inflation adjustment factor for the calendar year in which the sale occurs. There is no adjustment for inflation in the case of the credit for sales of natural gas produced from a tight formation. The credit begins to phase out if the annual average unregulated wellhead price per barrel of domestic crude oil exceeds $23.50 multiplied by the inflation adjustment factor.



The amount of the section 29 credit allowable with respect to a project is reduced by any unrecaptured business energy tax credit or enhanced oil recovery credit claimed with respect to such project.



As with most other credits, the section 29 credit may not be used to offset alternative minimum tax liability. Any unused section 29 credit generally may not be carried back or forward to another taxable year; however, a taxpayer receives a credit for prior year minimum tax liability to the extent that a section 29 credit is disallowed as a result of the operation of the alternative minimum tax. The credit is limited to what would have been the regular tax liability but for the alternative minimum tax.



**Effect of provision**



This provision provides a significant tax incentive (currently about $6 per barrel of oil equivalent or $1 per thousand cubic feet of natural gas, or roughly half the wellhead price of gas) for production of nonconventional fuels. Coalbed methane and gas from tight formations currently account for most of the credit.



**Enhanced oil recovery credit**



Taxpayers are permitted to claim a general business credit, which consists of several different components. One component of the general business credit is the enhanced oil recovery credit. The general business credit for a taxable year may not exceed the excess (if any) of the taxpayer's net income over the greater of (1) the tentative minimum tax, or (2) 25 percent of so much of the taxpayer's net regular tax liability as exceeds $25,000. Any unused general business credit generally may be carried back three taxable years and carried forward 15 taxable years.



The enhanced oil recovery credit for a taxable year is equal to 15 percent of certain costs attributable to qualified enhanced oil recovery (EOR) projects undertaken by the taxpayer in the United States during the taxable year. To the extent that a credit is allowed for such costs, the taxpayer must reduce the amount otherwise deductible or required to be capitalized and recovered through depreciation, depletion, or amortization, as appropriate, with respect to the costs. A taxpayer may elect not to have the enhanced oil recovery credit apply for a taxable year.



The amount of the enhanced oil recovery credit is reduced in a taxable year following a calendar year during which the annual average unregulated wellhead price per barrel of domestic crude oil exceeds $28 (adjusted for inflation since 1990). In such a case, the credit would be reduced ratably over a $6 phaseout range.



For purposes of the credit, qualified enhanced oil recovery costs include the following costs which are paid or incurred with respect to a qualified EOR project: (1) the cost of tangible property which is an integral part of the project and with respect to which depreciation or amortization is allowable; (2) IDCs that the taxpayer may elect to deduct; and (3) the cost of tertiary injectants with respect to which a deduction is allowable, whether or not chargeable to capital account.



A qualified EOR project means any project that is located within the United States and involves the application (in accordance with sound engineering principles) of one or more qualifying tertiary recovery methods which can reasonably be expected to result in more than an insignificant increase in the amount of crude oil which ultimately will be recovered. The qualifying tertiary recovery methods generally include the following nine methods: miscible fluid displacement, steam-drive injection, microemulsion flooding, in situ combustion, polymer-augmented water flooding, cyclic-steam injection, alkaline flooding, carbonated water flooding, and immiscible non-hydrocarbon gas displacement, or any other method approved by the IRS. In addition, for purposes of the enhanced oil recovery credit, immiscible non-hydrocarbon gas displacement generally is considered a qualifying tertiary recovery method, even if the gas injected is not carbon dioxide.



A project is not considered a qualified EOR project unless the project's operator submits to the IRS a certification from a petroleum engineer that the project meets the requirements set forth in the preceding paragraph.



The enhanced oil recovery credit is effective for taxable years beginning after December 31, 1990, with respect to costs paid or incurred in EOR projects begun or significantly expanded after that date.



**Effect of provision**



Conventional oil recovery methods do not recover all of a well's oil. Some of the remaining oil can be extracted by unconventional methods, but these methods are generally more costly and uneconomic at current world oil prices. In this environment, the EOR credit can increase recoverable reserves. Although recovering oil using EOR methods is more expensive than recovering it using conventional methods, it may be less expensive than producing oil from new reservoirs. At present world oil prices, this credit is fully available.

  **D. Alternative Minimum Tax** 

A taxpayer is subject to an alternative minimum tax (AMT) to the extent that its tentative minimum tax exceeds its regular income tax liability. A corporate taxpayer's tentative minimum tax generally equals 20 percent of its alternative minimum taxable income in excess of an exemption amount. (The marginal AMT rate for a noncorporate taxpayer is 26 or 28 percent, depending on the amount of its alternative minimum taxable income above an exemption amount.) Alternative minimum taxable income (AMTI) is the taxpayer's taxable income increased by certain tax preferences and adjusted by determining the tax treatment of certain items in a manner which negates the deferral of income resulting from the regular tax treatment of those items.



**AMT treatment of depletion**



As a general rule, percentage depletion deductions claimed in excess of the basis of the depletable property constitute an item of tax preference in determining the AMT. In addition, the AMTI of a corporation is increased by an amount equal to 75 percent of the amount by which adjusted current earnings (ACE) of the corporation exceed AMTI (as determined before this adjustment). In general, ACE means AMTI with additional adjustments that generally follow the rules presently applicable to corporations in computing their earnings and profits. As a general rule a corporation must use the cost depletion method in computing its ACE adjustment. Thus, the difference between a corporation's percentage depletion deduction (if any) claimed for regular tax purposes and its allowable deduction determined under the cost depletion method is factored into its overall ACE adjustment.



Excess percentage depletion deductions related to crude oil and natural gas production are not items of tax preference for AMT purposes. In addition, corporations that are independent oil and gas producers and royalty owners may determine depletion deductions using the percentage depletion method in computing their ACE adjustments.



**AMT treatment of IDCs**



The difference between the amount of a taxpayer's IDC deductions and the amount which would have been currently deductible had IDCs been capitalized and recovered over a 10-year period may constitute an item of tax preference for the AMT to the extent that this amount exceeds 65 percent of the taxpayer's net income from oil and gas properties for the taxable year (the excess IDC preference). In addition, for purposes of computing a corporation's ACE adjustment to the AMT, IDCs are capitalized and amortized over the 60-month period beginning with the month in which they are paid or incurred. The preference does not apply if the taxpayer elects to capitalize and amortize IDCs over a 60-month period for regular tax purposes.



IDCs related to oil and gas wells are generally not taken into account in computing the excess IDC preference of taxpayers that are not integrated oil companies. This treatment does not apply, however, to the extent it would reduce the amount of the taxpayer's AMTI by more than 40 percent of the amount that the taxpayer's AMTI would have been if those IDCs had been taken into account.



In addition, for corporations other than integrated oil companies, there is no ACE adjustment for IDCs with respect to oil and gas wells. That is, such a taxpayer is permitted to use its regular tax method of writing off those IDCs for purposes of computing its adjusted current earnings.



**Effect of provisions**



Absent these rules, the incentive effect of the special provisions for oil and gas would be reduced for firms subject to the AMT. These rules, however, effectively eliminate AMT concerns for independent producers.

  **E. Passive Activity Loss and Credit Rules** 

A taxpayer's deductions from passive trade or business activities, to the extent they exceed income from all such passive activities of the taxpayer (exclusive of portfolio income), generally may not be deducted against other income. Thus, for example, an individual taxpayer may not deduct losses from a passive activity against income from wages. Losses suspended under this passive activity loss limitation are carried forward and treated as deductions from passive activities in the following year, and thus may offset any income from passive activities generated in that later year. Undeducted losses from a passive activity may be deducted in full when the taxpayer disposes of its entire interest in that activity to an unrelated party in a transaction in which all realized gain or loss is recognized.



An activity generally is treated as passive if the taxpayer does not materially participate in it. A taxpayer is treated as materially participating in an activity only if the taxpayer is involved in the operations of the activity on a basis which is regular, continuous, and substantial.



A working interest in an oil or gas property generally is not treated as a passive activity, whether or not the taxpayer materially participates in the activities related to that property. This exception from the passive activity rules does not apply if the taxpayer holds the working interest through an entity which limits the liability of the taxpayer with respect to the interest. In addition, if a taxpayer has any loss for any taxable year from a working interest in an oil or gas property which is treated pursuant to this working interest exception as a loss which is not from a passive activity, then any net income from such property (or any property the basis of which is determined in whole or in part by reference to the basis of such property) for any succeeding taxable year is treated as income of the taxpayer which is not from a passive activity.



Similar limitations apply to the utilization of tax credits attributable to passive activities. Thus, for example, the passive activity rules (and, consequently, the oil and gas working interest exception to those rules) apply to the nonconventional fuels production credit and the enhanced oil recovery credit. However, if a taxpayer has net income from a working interest in an oil and gas property which is treated as not arising from a passive activity, then any tax credits attributable to the interest in that property would be treated as credits not from a passive activity (and, thus, not subject to the passive activity credit limitation) to the extent that the amount of the credits does not exceed the regular tax liability which is allocable to such net income.



**Effect of provision**



As a result of this exception from the passive loss limitations, owners of working interests in oil and gas properties may use losses from such interests to offset income from other sources.

  **F. Tertiary Injectants** 

Taxpayers are allowed to deduct the cost of qualified tertiary injectant expenses for the taxable year. Qualified tertiary injectant expenses are amounts paid or incurred for any tertiary injectant (other than recoverable hydrocarbon injectants) which is used as a part of a tertiary recovery method.



**Effect of provision**



The provision allowing the deduction for qualified tertiary injectant expenses resolves a disagreement between taxpayers (who considered such costs to be IDCs or operating expenses) and the IRS (which considered such costs to be subject to capitalization).



Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared testimony. I will be pleased to answer any questions you or other members of the Subcommittee may have.
