---
title: Weekly Release of U.S. Reserve Assets
date: 1999-03-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr3021
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the week ending March 12, 1999.

As indicated in this table, U.S. reserve assets totaled $73,292 million as of March 12, 1999, down from $73,788 million as of March 5, 1999.

 

U.S. Reserve Assets(millions of U.S. dollars)

**Week Ending Total Reserve Assets Gold Stock Special Drawing Rights   Foreign Currencies **ESF SOMA** Reserve Position in IMF **March 5, 1999** 73,788**

11,048

9,389

11,565

18,258

23,528

March 12, 1999

**73,292**

11,048

*9,416*

11,861

18,556

*22,411*   **Notes: Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of January 31, 1999. The December 31, 1998 value was $11,046 million.** is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of January 31, 1999. The December 31, 1998 value was $11,046 million.**Special Drawing Rights (SDR) holdings and the Reserve Position in the IMF are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for March 5, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of March 12, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the March 5, 1999 IMF data.**(SDR) holdings and the are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for March 5, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of March 12, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the March 5, 1999 IMF data.**Foreign Currencies includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account ( SOMA). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.** includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund () and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.**Reserve Position in IMF for the week ending March 12,1999 also reflects preliminary adjustments for the repayment of loans to the IMF of SDR 361 million under the General Arrangements to Borrow (GAB) in July 1998, and SDR 619 million under the New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB) in December 1998.** for the week ending March 12,1999 also reflects preliminary adjustments for the repayment of loans to the IMF of SDR 361 million under the General Arrangements to Borrow (GAB) in July 1998, and SDR 619 million under the New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB) in December 1998.
