---
title: TREASURY DEPARTMENT LAUNCHES PILOT ATM PROGRAM IN BALTIMORE
date: 1999-11-08
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls217
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-217

Treasury Under Secretary for Domestic Finance Gary Gensler unveiled on Monday an innovative pilot program in Baltimore which places automated teller machines (ATMs) in post offices to increase access to financial services in the communities in need.

Providing safe and convenient access to banking services in traditionally underserved communities will help to ensure that the financial system is working for all Americans, said Under Secretary Gensler. This ATM will help to ensure that families in this neighborhood can have bank accounts that are truly accessible.

Under Secretary Gensler was joined at the event by Senator Paul Sarbanes (D-MD), Post Master General William J. Henderson, and Key Corporation Chairman and CEO Robert W. Gillespie. They unveiled an ATM at the post office at Lexington Market Center, 130 North Greene Street in Baltimore.

This program is part of the Treasury Department's ongoing effort to improve access to financial services and to move individuals into the financial mainstream. Treasury is partnering with the U.S. Postal Service in this one-year pilot program to provide access to money through commercial automated teller machines in local post offices.

Customers may use ATM, debit or credit cards issued by most financial institutions in the Baltimore-area. Additionally, the pilot ATMs will provide access to Maryland Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) services, state cash benefits otherwise known as the Maryland Independence Card. There will be no fee charged to use the ATM.

KeyBank, N.A., of Cleveland, Ohio, will own, operate and maintain the ATMs.

In addition to the Lexington Market Center post office, Baltimore has two other pilot locations: the Druid Station post office at 1826 Pennsylvania Avenue and the South Station post office at 146 West Ostend Street. Three pilot locations have also been established in rural areas outside Tallahassee, Florida.
