---
title: WEEKLY RELEASE OF U.S. RESERVE ASSETS
date: 1999-11-30
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls268
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-268

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the week ending November 26, 1999.

As this table indicates, U.S. reserve assets totaled $71,906 million as of November 26, 1999, down from $72,128 million as of November 19, 1999.

 

U.S. Reserve Assets

(millions of U.S. dollars)

**Week Ending Total Reserve Assets Gold Stock Special Drawing Rights   Foreign Currencies **ESF      SOMA** Reserve Position in IMF **November 19, 1999** 72,128**

11,047

10,361

15,900

15,903

18,916

November 26, 1999

**71,906**

11,049

*10,126*

16,121

16,123

*18,487*   **Notes:  Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of October 31, 1999. The September 30, 1999 value was $11,047 million.** is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of October 31, 1999. The September 30, 1999 value was $11,047 million.**Special Drawing Rights (SDR) holdings and the Reserve Position in the IMF are based on IMF data and valued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for November 19, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of November 26, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the November 19, 1999 IMF data.**(SDR) holdings and the are based on IMF data and valued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for November 19, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of November 26, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the November 19, 1999 IMF data.**Foreign Currencies includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account ( SOMA). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.** includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund () and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.
