---
title: Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin Remarks at National Academy of Finance and Wilson High School Partnership
date: 1999-03-08
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2988
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

I am pleased to return to Wilson High School on the occasion of the signing of a memorandum of understanding creating a national partnership between the National Academy Foundation (NAF) and the Treasury Department. Let me begin by recognizing the presence here of some of the people who have made this partnership possible, Sam Golden and Ed Hanley from Treasury's Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Mint Director Phillip Diehl, the many distinguished people who will serve on the Advisory Board for the Finance Academy, and, of course, Sandy Weill of Citigroup. Sandy is founder of the NAF, and one of the great leaders of the American financial industry. His presence here and involvement in this partnership is a testament to his commitment to education. I would also like to welcome back to Wilson, Nina Hurwitz, a former teacher, and wife of our consultant on education issues, Sol Hurwitz. She is returning to Wilson for the first time since her graduation from Wilson nearly 45 years ago.

Treasury has had a close and productive partnership with Wilson High School over the last three years. In that time, more than 100 Wilson students have interned in Treasury offices, and in the last two years, Treasury has supported the Business and Finance Academy, which, under this partnership will now be called the Wilson Academy of Finance.

Today, I would like to say just a few words about the importance of education, and how the Federal government and the business community can help.

One thing I have learned in my career, both during my twenty-six years in business and finance on Wall Street, and then at the White House and as Secretary of the Treasury, is the importance of education in achieving one's career goals. Getting a good education has always been a key to prosperity, but education is even more important now. In today's global economy, information and knowledge are fundamental requisites for success.

Studying hard is up to you. However, while government and business cannot study for you, there are things we can do: we can enhance your educational opportunities through support for efforts such as this academy; we can provide you with internships and jobs if you do well in school; and we in the Federal government can make higher education more affordable through Pell Grants, Hope Scholarships, tuition deductions, and the national service program.

As I mentioned earlier, at Treasury we try to assist students by offering internships to high school students which provide students substantial and valuable work experience as they pursue their career goals. I would encourage you to consider applying for an internship next summer. Our Partnership in Education program also supports the Wilson Academy of Finance through donations of computers and through workshops on college preparation and personal finances, and by providing speakers so that you can learn more about specific career areas. I would also encourage you to take advantage of these opportunities. Career academies such as the Academy of Finance here at Wilson can play an important role in helping you gain the skills you will need to further your educational and career plans. After all, I would like to remind you that Warren Buffet, the second wealthiest person in the country by most estimates, is a graduate of Wilson.

The agreement we are signing today builds on the existing affiliation between Treasury and Wilson by launching the partnership between NAF and Treasury. This partnership signifies NAF's support for the Wilson Academy of Finance, and lays the foundation for broader cooperation between NAF and Treasury. NAF assists almost 300 academies around the country and provides schools with industry validated and structured curricula. NAF's sponsorship of the Academy of Finance will strengthen and solidify the Academy, help your teachers better measure your performance, and it will therefore, help each of you be better prepared for the future.

Let me conclude by wishing you all the best as you continue your education. Sandy and I would now welcome any questions the students may have. Thank you very much.
