---
title: WEEKLY RELEASE OF U.S. RESERVE ASSETS
date: 1999-11-23
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls260
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-260

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the week ending November 19, 1999.

As this table indicates, U.S. reserve assets totaled $72,068 million as of November 19, 1999, down from $72,339 million as of November 12, 1999.

 

U.S. Reserve Assets

(millions of U.S. dollars)

**Week Ending Total Reserve Assets Gold Stock Special Drawing Rights   Foreign Currencies** ESF      SOMA** Reserve Position in IMF** November 12, 1999**72,339**

11,047

10,385

15,966

15,969

18,972

November 19, 1999

**72,068**

11,047

*10,336*

15,900

15,903

*18,882*   **Notes:  Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of September 30, 1999. The August 31, 1999 value was $11,046 million.** is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of September 30, 1999. The August 31, 1999 value was $11,046 million.** Special Drawing Rights (SDR) holdings and the Reserve Position in the IMF are based on IMF data and valued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for November 12, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of November 19, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the November 12, 1999 IMF data.**(SDR) holdings and the are based on IMF data and valued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for November 12, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of November 19, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the November 12, 1999 IMF data.** Foreign Currencies includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account ( SOMA). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.** includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund () and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.
