---
title: WEEKLY RELEASE OF U.S. RESERVE ASSETS
date: 1999-03-02
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2989
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the week ending February 26, 1999.

As indicated in this table, U.S. reserve assets totaled $75,316 million as of February 26, 1999, down from $75,459 million as of February 19, 1999.

U.S. Reserve Assets(millions of U.S. dollars)

**Week Ending Total Reserve Assets Gold Stock Special Drawing Rights   Foreign Currencies** ESF SOMA** Reserve Position in IMF** February 19, 1999

75,459

11,048

9,588

11,734

18,586

24,505

February 26, 1999

75,316

11,048

*9,474*

11,893

18,624

*24,277* **Notes: Gold Stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of January 31, 1999. The December 31, 1998 value was $11,046 million.** is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of January 31, 1999. The December 31, 1998 value was $11,046 million.** Special Drawing Rights (SDR) holdings and the Reserve Position in the IMF are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for February 19, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of February 26, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the February 19, 1999 IMF data in light of U.S. sales of SDR to other IMF member countries.** (SDR) holdings and the are based on IMF data and revalued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate. Consistent with current reporting practices, IMF data for February 19, 1999 are final. Data for SDR holdings and the reserve position in the IMF shown as of February 26, 1999 (in italics) reflect preliminary adjustments by the Treasury to the February 19, 1999 IMF data in light of U.S. sales of SDR to other IMF member countries.** Foreign Currencies includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account ( SOMA). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.** includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund () and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (). These holdings are valued at current market exchange rates or, where appropriate, at such other rates as may be agreed upon by the parties to the transactions.

The **Reserve Position in the IMF** includes SDR 361 million loan to the IMF under the General Arrangements to Borrow (GAB) in July 1998, and an SDR 619 million loan to the IMF under the New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB) in December 1998.
