---
title: SECRETARY RUBIN ANNOUNCES NEW FINCEN DIRECTOR
date: 1999-03-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr3013
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin on Wednesday announced the third Director of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), James F. Sloan.

Jim Sloan's long and distinguished career with the Secret Service has prepared him well to lead Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, Secretary Rubin said. FinCEN serves as a critical link among the law enforcement, financial and regulatory communities and maximizes the information-sharing network to prevent and detect financial crime.

Sloan, 52, currently serves as the Deputy Assistant Director of the Office of Protective Operations with the Secret Service. Sloan began his 21-year tenure with the Secret Service in 1978 as a special agent in the New York Field Office. He has served in several investigative and managerial positions including as Special Agent in Charge (Boston Field Office); Special Agent in Charge of the Office of Investigations, Assistant Special Agent in Charge (Baltimore Field Office); Assistant to the Special Agent in Charge of the Presidential Protective Division and Assistant Special Agent in Charge of the Office of Administration. Prior to joining the Secret Service, he served in the United States Army from 1966 to 1969 and as a police officer in Union County, N.J. from 1970 to 1978.

A native of Springfield, Mass., Sloan received his Bachelor of Arts in Political Science from Kean College of New Jersey and is a Senior Executive Fellow with Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government. Sloan has received numerous achievement and performance awards throughout his distinguished law enforcement career.

Established in 1990, FinCEN supports the Administration's anti-money laundering efforts by supporting law enforcement investigations and operations through collection and analysis of data, including Bank Secrecy Act filings. FinCEN assists Treasury and other government agencies by providing trend analysis and threat assessments, regulating financial and other institutions under the Bank Secrecy Act, and fostering international cooperation in efforts to deter and detect money laundering.
