---
title: TREASURY MOVES TO COMPLY WITH SDDS
date: 1999-02-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/rr2960
---

The Treasury Department announced today two additions to its statistical reporting, motivated by the IMF's Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS). First, monthly data on the gross foreign claims and liabilities of the banking sector are published on the Internet.. Data are available on a global basis and for specific regions. The quarterly Treasury Bulletin also includes data on gross foreign claims and liabilities (Table CM I-4 for liabilities and Table CM II-3 for claims). A notice that monthly data are available on the Internet will be included in future editions of the Treasury Bulletin. Second, a maturity breakdown of total outstanding central government debt will be published in future releases of the Monthly Statement of Public Debt. Currently, a maturity breakdown is published only for marketable securities.



Data as of January 31, 1999 are as follows:



<table align="center" border="1" width="90%"><caption align="bottom"><font size="-1"><sup>1</sup>Maturity of over one year.<br/><sup>2</sup>Total is for public debt securities. Does not include agency securities, which cannot be broken down by maturity. However, these represent less than 1% of total outstanding debt of the federal government. </font></caption><tbody><tr><td align="center" colspan="2"><b>Maturity Breakdown of Total Outstanding Debt</b><br/>($ millions)</td></tr> <tr><td colspan="2"><b>Short-Term Debt</b></td></tr> <tr><td width="65%">Treasury Bills</td> <td width="35%">662,725</td></tr> <tr><td width="65%">Nonmarketable</td> <td width="35%"><u>259,066</u></td></tr> <tr><td width="65%">Total Short-Term Debt</td> <td width="35%">921,791</td></tr> <tr><td colspan="2"><b>Long-Term Debt <sup>1</sup></b></td></tr> <tr><td colspan="2">Marketable</td></tr> <tr><td width="65%">Treasury Notes</td> <td width="35%">1,976,869</td></tr> <tr><td width="65%">Treasury Bonds</td> <td width="35%"><u>653,209</u></td></tr> <tr><td width="65%">Total Marketable</td> <td width="35%">2,630,078</td></tr> <tr><td width="65%">Nonmarketable</td> <td width="35%"><u>2,016,194</u></td></tr> <tr><td width="65%">Total Long-Term Debt</td> <td width="35%">4,646,272</td></tr> <tr><td width="65%"><b>Grand Total Outstanding Debt <sup>2</sup></b></td> <td width="35%"><b>5,568,063</b></td></tr></tbody></table>



The SDDS was established in 1996 to provide guidance on the dissemination of economic and financial data for countries that have, or that might seek, access to international capital markets. The United States is a subscriber to the SDDS.
