---
title: President's Task Force Reports On Revitalizing Southwest Border
date: 2000-05-25
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls667
---
*(Archived Content)*



ls-667

  

Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers today presented a report on revitalizing communities along the Southwest Border to Vice President Al Gore. The First Annual Report of the President's Southwest Border Task Force announces 16 new initiatives and makes a wide range of policy recommendations designed to promote sustainable economic development in the region.



I am very pleased to receive this report from Secretary Summers and the Southwest Border Task Force, said Vice President Gore. Our nation is experiencing unprecedented economic prosperity, and we have a responsibility to ensure that no family or community is left behind. I am glad to be a part of this initiative empowering Southwest Border communities and giving them the tools they need to help themselves.



Secretary Summers, chair of the Task Force, said: In this time of economic success, when jobs are looking for people as much as people are looking for jobs, it is particularly important that we take advantage of all of our economic potential, including that of the Southwest Border region. While concern for our distressed areas was once considered a social and developmental issue, it is now crucial to our economic expansion.



The First Annual Report is highlighted by 16 new initiatives designed by federal agencies to improve access to capital, foster small business development, promote financial literacy, improve living conditions, provide enhanced technical assistance to rural communities, address transportation needs, and develop new energy technologies and sources along the border.



Three of these new initiatives were simultaneously kicked-off yesterday in an event in El Paso, Texas coordinated by Congressman Silvestre Reyes and the U.S.-Mexico Chamber of Commerce. These included:


- Wiring the Border -- a public-private partnership designed to bring e-commerce capability to small businesses in the border region,
- The Southwest Border BusinessLINC Coalition -- a business mentoring network designed to promote mentor/protege pairings between large U.S. corporations in Mexico and small U.S. businesses across the border, and
- The Utility Infrastructure Corridor Study -- an Energy Department study to analyze potential coordination of cross-border utility infrastructure.


In the next few weeks, the Task Force will also be announcing the border communities selected to participate in a pilot program designed to enhance the coordination of federal response to local economic development activities.



The Southwest Border region, stretching from the Gulf of Mexico in Texas, across New Mexico and Arizona, and continuing through California to the Pacific Ocean, remains severely distressed, despite the tremendous new opportunities brought about by the recent strength of the nation's economy.



The Southwest Border Task Force, formed last May by the President's Executive Order 13122, seeks to encourage increased coordination between federal, state and local government agencies, the private sector, nongovernmental organizations and other border stakeholders in order to better leverage existing efforts aimed at the Southwest Border region. Its ultimate goal is to create the conditions necessary for strong, sustainable economic growth.



The Task Force is comprised of the President's entire Cabinet, as well as other key federal agencies, and reports to the Vice President in his role as head of the Community Empowerment Board. As of today, Secretary of Agriculture Dan Glickman will rotate in as the new Chair of the Task Force, with Secretary Summers and Secretary of Labor Alexis Herman serving as Co-Chairs.



The First Annual Report, as well as additional information on the Task Force, can be found on the Treasury Department web site at[http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/reports/border.pdf](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/border.pdf)
