---
title: STATEMENT BY TREASURY DEPUTY SECRETARY STUART E. EIZENSTAT
date: 2000-11-22
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls1045
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-1045

In my capacity as the Special Representative of the President and the Secretary of State for Holocaust Issues, I welcome the decision of the National Gallery of Art to relinquish a painting after determining that in all probability the Nazis confiscated the painting during the occupation of France. I was particularly pleased to note that this decision was taken after examining the provenance of the painting and publicizing the provenance information on its web site in accordance with the Washington Conference Principles on Nazi - Confiscated Art, as well as the Guidelines of the Association of Art Museum Directors. In December 1998, the Washington Conference on Holocaust Era Assets adopted non-binding principles to assist in resolving issues relating to Nazi - confiscated art. One of the principles calls for an examination of gaps or ambiguities in the provenance in light of the passage of time and the circumstances of the Holocaust era.

I am also pleased that other American museums are taking an interest in posting on web sites works of doubtful provenance from the Holocaust era. The eight largest museums in the United States have identified hundreds of paintings in this category. Likewise, major museums around the world are taking similar action. The decision by the National Gallery sets a standard for the return of Nazi-confiscated art that we hope other U.S. museums and museums around the world will follow.
