---
title: TREASURY CALLS FOR LARGE POSITION REPORTS
date: 2000-09-13
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls870
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-870

The Treasury is calling for Large Position Reports from those entities whose reportable position in the 5-3/4% Treasury Notes of August 2010 equals or exceeds $2 billion as of close of business Tuesday, September 12, 2000. This call for Large Position Reports is a test. Entities with reportable positions in this note equal to or exceeding this $2 billion threshold must report these positions to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Entities with positions in this note below $2 billion are not required to file Large Position Reports. Reports, which must include the required position and administrative information, must be received by the Securities Reports Division of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York before noon Eastern time on Tuesday, September 19, 2000. Large Position Reports may be filed by facsimile at (212) 720-5030 or delivered to the Bank at 33 Liberty Street, 1st floor.

**Details on Call for Large Position Reports Security Description: ** 5-3/4% Treasury Notes of August 2010, Series C-2010 ** CUSIP Number: ** 912827 6J 6 ** CUSIP Number of STRIPS Principal Component: ** 912820 FT 9 ** Maturity Date: ** August 15, 2010 ** Date for Which Information Must Be Reported: ** September 12, 2000 as of COB ** Large Position Reporting Threshold: ** $2 Billion (Par Value)** Date Report Is Due:** September 19, 2000, before noon Eastern time

This call for large position information is made under Treasury's large position reporting rules (17 CFR Part 420). The notice calling for Large Position Reports is also being published in the Federal Register. This press release and a copy of a sample Large Position Report, which appears in Appendix B of the rules at 17 CFR Part 420, can be obtained from Treasury's automated fax system by calling (202) 622-2040 and requesting document number 870. These documents are also available at the Bureau of the Public Debt's Internet site at the following address: http://www.publicdebt.treas.gov.

Questions about Treasury's large position reporting rules should be directed to Public Debt's Government Securities Regulations Staff at (202) 691-3632. Questions regarding the method of submission of Large Position Reports may be directed to the Securities Reports Division of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at (212) 720-1449.
