---
title: '"Indonesia and the Challenge of Lasting Recovery" United States Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers Jakarta, Indonesia'
date: 2000-01-24
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls348
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-348

Thank you. With a new government, a more stable macro-economy and rising growth and confidence across Asia, Indonesia is now opening a new chapter of its history. As the government begins to address the many challenges that lie ahead, I am glad to have the opportunity to see the new environment for myself - and think about the prospects for the future.

One message that President Clinton expressed to President Wahid last November I am glad to repeat to you here: the United States and the entire Asia-Pacific region has a major stake in your success and we stand ready to support the government as it works to build a new Indonesia.

We have been reminded once again this week that Indonesia's greatest challenges in the months ahead are fundamentally political. But inseparable from the challenge of political integration and the deepening of democracy is the economic challenge of developing an integrated and vibrant national economy. With that in mind, I want to focus today on the major economic, financial and institutional priorities facing Indonesia as we enter this new century.

Let me touch on three topics:

- First, the core lessons to date of the financial crisis in Asian and other emerging market economies.
- Second, the implications for the Indonesia government and the new Indonesia that it hopes to create.
- Third, the approach that the United States and the international community will take going forward in supporting the kind of stable and successful Indonesia we all want to see.
**I. Lessons of the Recovery in Asia ** The financial crises that began in Thailand in the summer of 1997 brought out very clearly that in a new global economy, national weaknesses in policies and institutions will be punished more quickly and severely by international markets than was true in the past. At the same time, they have perhaps also shown that governments that are able to respond effectively to these problems will be rewarded that much more rapidly.

We see this around the region today, where economic and financial prospects look much brighter today than they did even a year ago when I last visited the region - not to mention two years ago when crises were all around us. If anyone had predicted then that every Asian emerging market economy would achieve positive growth in 1999 - that prediction would surely have been greeted with some skepticism.

While there are important caveats and risks, we can now say that crisis economies in Asia and further afield whose governments were able to respond decisively to their financial problems and with international official support have benefited enormously from that response.

- In Korea, the economy grew by more than 9 percent in 1999 - and private sector forecasters expect healthy growth to continue in 2000. Short-term interest rates and inflation are both in the low single digits, unemployment has almost halved since the start of 1999 and capital inflows are returning.
- Thailand, the first country to enter crisis, is growing by around 5 percent. Short-term interest rates are around 4 percent, and output and consumption are returning to pre-crisis levels.
- And in Brazil, inflation has been contained in the wake of last year's devaluation of the*real;*the recession in the economy has been shorter and shallower than many expected; and private forecasters are predicting solid growth for the year ahead.

What explains these strong results? The elements were many and varied but some stand out as especially crucial. These are:

- The development and implementation of a sound framework for fiscal and monetary policy that helped stabilize the financial markets and support an early return to growth.
- Rapid implementation of a credible plan for financial and corporate sector restructuring - so that the overhang of debt could be lifted and private sector lending and growth could resume.
- Early commitment to strengthening national institutions and creating the right legal and regulatory infrastructure for private investment and growth: especially the rule of law.
- And, crucial to all of these, credible political leadership that can inspire the confidence of citizens and markets and get things done. This has perhaps been most striking in Korea, where President Kim Dae Jung's arrival in office, in retrospect, marked a turning point.

These elements, in turn, shed light on recent economic developments in Indonesia. Here the authorities' commitment to sound macro-economic policies has restored broad economic stability. But a failure to move forward with restructuring and institutional reform has prevented Indonesia from enjoying the full fruits of a recovery. Inflation is now low and growth was positive last year. But at less than 1 percent, Indonesia's growth rate was by some margin the slowest of all the Asian crisis economies last year, and output is still not yet back to pre-crisis levels.

With a new government and the first democratically President and vice-president in Indonesia's history, there must be a real prospect that this period of uncertainty and log-jammed reform can draw to a close. The array of challenges facing President Wahid and his Administration is formidable indeed. But we know from the experience of Korea and others that failures that are inherited from the past can also be problems that are easier to confront.

Every nation in the Asia Pacific - and the international community as a whole - has a great stake in Indonesia seizing this special moment of opportunity as we consider the contours of a new regional global economy. One can perhaps imagine a situation in which other economies in the region perform better than Indonesia for some period of time. But it is inconceivable that the region as a whole could prosper in the years ahead without an open, stable, and vibrant Indonesia.

In a moment I will discuss briefly the approach that the United States will take to supporting this objective. But we know well that what will matter most of all will be the steps that are taken here at home. It is to these core priorities that I now turn.

**II. Reform Priorities for New Indonesian Economy ** One way to express the challenges that Indonesia faces today is that Indonesia has now won government by the people - what it has yet to create is government for the people. What does that mean? It means building the foundations for a system that is not simply more just and even-handed, but seen to be so by Indonesians and the world at large.

Listening to Indonesians and others talk about this country today I have been struck by the degree to which this desire for a more just system of doing things permeates every aspect of national discussion. It is truly the hallmark of a new Indonesia. And its greatest triumph has been the successful conduct of last June's parliamentary elections - which brought a new government to power through a process that was widely considered free and fair.

The question facing all Indonesians today - and all Indonesia's friends in the wider world - is how to bring this national aspiration to concrete fruition.

- This is a question of national identity and stability, because improved governance will be fundamental to political and social stability - perhaps even national territorial integrity - over the long-term and the basis for deepening democracy going forward.
- It is also a crucial national economic question, because an Indonesia that cannot earn the confidence of its citizens that due process will be followed and the laws enforced will equally fail to earn the confidence of businesses and investors that a growing and integrated new Indonesia will depend on.

Businesses used to cite the stability of the Soeharto government as an important weight in their investment calculations. The perception that you could count on commitments if he had endorsed them counterbalanced the widespread conviction that the courts did not supply reliable investor protection. In the new Asia, that kind of stability is no longer sufficient. Indonesian and foreign investors alike now seek another kind of stability: one that comes with the rule of law; the certainty that market mechanisms will be allowed, even made, to operate; and the trust that public institutions are there to serve everyone not just the favored few.

That will involve reforms across a wide range of fronts, in addition to the maintenance of continued macro-economic policies, going forward. Let me highlight two that will be especially crucial.

*First, Rapid and Transparent Financial and Corporate Sector Restructuring *

Nothing in recent years has better symbolized, to Indonesians and the outside world, the authorities' failure to move forward with reform than the failure to make inroads on the huge burden of corporate and financial sector debt. The institutions to do this are now in place. What is needed is the determination and political will to let those institutions do their work - despite the deep sensitivities that may be involved and despite the entrenched pressures for delay.

The new 3-year IMF program attests to the international community's desire to move forward from the Bank Bali scandal and commits the government to a new start in the financial and corporate restructuring process. But as the IMF has made clear - and we ourselves have stressed in our discussions with the authorities - the critical signal to those who are asking themselves where this new government will take Indonesia will not be strong words but strong action.

In this context, early concrete examples have the potential to be defining. Notably:

- An early demonstration that IBRA and those involved in its work are able to pursue the full sweep of their mandate independent of outside pressure - from whatever quarter.
- The transfer of a government-owned bank into private sector hands, as part of a comprehensive and transparent plan to restructure, privatize, and recapitalize Indonesia's banks or, where necessary, foreclose on insolvent institutions.
- Evidence of clear progress on disposal of bad assets by IBRA, even where this means accepting the previously unacceptable. Debts whose market value is not going to be realized need to be written down. And asset disposal must proceed so as to save precious public resources that are urgently needed elsewhere. The fear of fire sales is understandable, but all the relevant experience in this area, in Asia and elsewhere, suggests that if you hold firm against low prices today, you will face even lower prices tomorrow.
- Demonstration of a new willingness to see foreign investors as a crucial part of the solution to Indonesia's corporate and financial sector debt problems - and not part of the problem. As is has been true elsewhere in Asia, foreign banks could be an important support for financial sector reform in Indonesia, not only as sources of needed capital but greater financial resilience in the future.
- Decisive and even-handed use of IBRA's extra-judicial powers to bring debtors to the table. After a long time in which these powers have largely been inoperative, it must be seen to go after uncooperative debtors, regardless of their political connections. In the cases where IBRA is not the major creditor, the Jakarta Initiative Task Force also needs to be seen to have the resources and mandate to bring reluctant debtors to the table.
- And, not least, investigation and prosecution of judges who have engaged in corrupt practices. The word must go out that in a new Indonesia, no one is above the law and the laws will be fairly enforced.
*Second, a more effective infrastructure for investing in people*

As I have noted, effective management of financial and corporate restructuring takes on added urgency today because every rupiah wasted propping up the institutions of the old Indonesia is a rupiah that could have been spent building the institutions of the future.

Of these, none will be more important than institutions and policies for investing in people. In a new global economy in which capital moves more freely and labor does not, a country's most distinctive resource will increasingly be its people. A new Indonesia will be one that puts broad-based human development top on the agenda - as a moral imperative and also an economic imperative, because Indonesians will not support a new kind of economy unless they believe that it works for them.

The rapid growth that Indonesia achieved from the early 1970s until the mid-1990s was fairly successful in helping to lift all boats in the economy and keep poverty on a downward path. This provides the best reason for now putting the macro- and micro- ingredients for a long-term recovery in place. But in an increasingly constrained budgetary environment, it will be equally vital to ensure that social investments are better targeted to the people who need them most.

- That means building on past successes in community-based provision of basic social services, with greater decentralization and transparency and wider participation to command credibility and popular trust.
- It means maintaining and extending the impressive efforts that have been made to keep children in school through the crisis - an investment that will pay off many times over in faster growth and greater social cohesion in the years to come.
- It means a new focus on greater and more effective provision of critical health services, which have perhaps been hit hardest by the crisis - particularly basic preventive and curative services and a revived emphasis on family planning.

In their financial support and technical advice the IMF and, especially, the World Bank have been working to promote these investments in Indonesia in recent years. I am glad to note that with the election behind us this support is going to be increased, notably with the disbursement of the World Bank's $600 million social safety net adjustment loan for both safeguarding key parts of the Indonesian social safety net and improving their design.

Those who have studied economies over the years have come to an ever-broader understanding of the ingredients of economic growth:

- The ability to mobilize physical capital is important, which is why the creation of a strong financial system is so crucial.
- The ability to mobilize human capital is important, which is why the right institutions for investment in people are so crucial.
- And increasingly, we are coming to understand that the ability to mobilize social capital and the presence of the right kind of institutions to protect and mediate social capital can also be vitally important to a nation's economic success.

That is why the recent flourishing of NGOs in Indonesia is so welcome in the current context. And it is why establishing a strong legal system and support for reform of the justice system will be so important to Indonesia in the months ahead - as a basic underpinning not just of commerce but of the rights of individual Indonesians and their confidence that these rights will be protected.

**III. Concluding Remarks ** I have stressed today that Indonesia's most crucial challenges are those of institution-building and political leadership. However much we may desire these things in Indonesia - or any other country - the international community can do nothing to promote them if the commitment at the national level is lacking. But in the context of united and determined new leadership, we can and do stand willing to help provide the greatest prospect for success.

Indonesia's supporters are scheduled to meet here in Jakarta at the start of next month for an historic session of the Consultative Group on Indonesia. I hope and anticipate that the broad themes of institutional reform and a just system of government for Indonesia that I have discussed today will feature heavily in the Indonesian government's presentations to the donor community at that time. And I am confident that the US and all of the CGI's members will be eager to support the new government's initiatives in this broad and crucial area.

In the context of continued reforms, the United States will continue to work bilaterally on a wide range of fronts to support lasting change in Indonesia. Indeed, we hope that we will be able to increase our bilateral financial support significantly over the next two years. As you may know, a United States mission, including representatives from Treasury, is also in Indonesia right now assessing how best we can provide technical assistance at this crucial time.

At a multilateral level, we will also work to ensure that the right kind of official support for a reforming new Indonesia:

These steps underline our support for a new Indonesia, and our belief that in the right circumstances, external support can make an important difference. But once again, the international community cannot want reform and stability in a country any more than a country's own government and its people do. And it cannot lead such an effort from the outside.

Leadership from the very top has seldom been more important to a country's future than it will be in Indonesia today. That is why I was so pleased that in my discussions with President Wahid this morning that he recognized the importance of speed, openness, transparency and commitment as the government works to implement its reform agenda in the months ahead.

The crisis highlighted the fundamental elements of the Indonesian model that needed to change. But it has equally presented the country with a rare opportunity to strengthen policies, rebuild institutions, reinvest in people - and emerge a more resilient and inclusive society than it has ever been. The United States, the rest of Asia, and the global community as a whole have a major stake in Indonesia's new leadership seizing that opportunity with both hands. Thank you.
