---
title: TREASURY DEPUTY SECRETARY STUART E.EIZENSTAT REMARKS AT THE EMBASSY OF ROMANIA WASHINGTON, DC
date: 2000-12-01
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls1057
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-1057

Ambassador Geoana, Mrs. Geoana, distinguished guests - it is a pleasure for me to be here on the occasion of Romania's National Day celebration.

It was 82 years ago today that Romania achieved unity and independence in keeping with the principles of national self-determination enunciated by our President Woodrow Wilson, whose home is just a few blocks from this Embassy. The people of your country, Mr. Ambassador, have a long and proud history in the heart of Southeast Europe. They live in one of the most remarkably beautiful regions in the world. In joining you on this happy occasion, we express the fond hope that your nation and its people will have a bright future in the new Millennium.

We in the United States are proud of the contribution Americans of Romanian descent have made to our country, and we appreciate the work your Embassy is doing to facilitate increased investment in Romania by them and by others.

Today marks the tenth anniversary of the beginning of Romania's transition to democracy and a market economy. We applaud the progress you have made in such a short time, and hope to work with you to complete your transition to full integration into the Euro-Atlantic family. I am glad to have the opportunity to salute Romania as a valued and important friend.

We are joined together by a common commitment to democratic institutions. It is a tribute to Romania's dedication to democracy that the recent elections were judged to be free, fair and transparent. This is not a casual accomplishment, and should be noted with pride by all Romanians.

The elections have captured everyone's attention, and we will watch with interest to see the results of the second round of presidential elections on December 10. While the path of reform is never an easy one, Romania has made real progress and is on the way towards integration with Europe as the start of negotiations with the EU demonstrate. Romania's friends want to see them succeed in the road toward full integration in Euro-Atlantic institutions. Ultimately, success in these endeavors will depend on the Romanian people and the leaders they choose.

The United States hopes to continue its close cooperation with the new Romanian government. Our ability to do so will depend on the degree to which Romania's leadership continues to share our commitment to common Euro-Atlantic standards of democracy, respect for the rule of law, and protection of human rights, including the rights of minorities.

In the coming year, the United States also looks forward to working with Romania in a variety of different capacities:

- First, as a partner in building democracy and regional cooperation in Southeast Europe. Having achieved much this year, we need to strive together to further the accomplishments that have been made to date;
- Second, as Chair in Office of the OSCE. Chairing the OSCE will offer Romania major challenges and opportunities - especially the opportunity to help complete our vision of Europe -- whole, free and at peace. We want to work together to achieve progress in building democratic institutions; to develop greater respect for the rule of law; and to protect human rights, including the rights of minorities.
- Third, as a fellow member in the Partnership for Peace program, where together we seek to improve cooperation and strengthen the foundations of peace and stability in Europe.

We will do all we can to support Romania as it takes further steps on the path of democratic and economic transition. Let us pledge to work together to further our goals and achieve true progress in the coming years.
