---
title: '"DEVELOPMENT AND INTEGRATION: TOWARD A NEW GLOBAL CONSENSUS" TREASURY SECRETARY LAWRENCE H. SUMMERS REMARKS TO THE UNITED NATIONS ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL NEW YORK, NY'
date: 2000-07-05
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls750
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-750

I am glad to be here at the United Nations to address the issue of global development, because there is no greater challenge than global development and because the success or failure of the UN system that will be critical to ensuring that that challenge is met. This will be a central focus at the upcoming meetings in Japan of both the G7 Finance Ministers and the G8 heads - and must be the crucial long-term question for all of the world's governments in the years ahead.

- It must be the central moral question of our time, when 1.2 billion people on this planet live on less than a dollar a day.
- It must be a central global security question, when some of the greatest conflicts in the world have had their roots in economic failure and despair.
- And it must be a central global economic question, when the world is more integrated than ever before, and when the aging of the major industrial countries gives them an even greater stake in growing markets and opportunities overseas.

The post-Cold War era has been an era that is defined by what it follows, not what it is. But in the absence of major geopolitical conflicts, the successful integration of the poorest economies must surely be the defining challenge of the era to come.

- We saw this in the debates inside, and outside, the conference halls at the WTO meetings last year in Seattle and more recently regarding China's entry to the WTO.
- We see it in ongoing debates about development assistance and the reform of the World Bank, International Monetary Fund and other international financial institutions.
- And we see it in the unprecedented global support for the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries initiative to reduce the debts of the poorest countries in this millennial year.

These debates are not over. In many ways, they have hardly begun. But in the fire of argument we can also glean the beginnings of a new global consensus: growing areas of agreement on how to build a truly global economy, and how to make it work for all its members. Today I want to reflect on some of the framing realities for this new consensus, and some of its core elements.

**I. The Framing Realities of a New Global Economy** This new global consensus starts from some basic realities about the world of the early 21stcentury:

- First, there can be no successful economic development without economic growth. This has lately been portrayed as a question for debate. But the truth is that no serious observer doubts the centrality of growth. Experience and academic evidence point up the same conclusion time and again. In every time in history and every region, the incomes of the poorest cannot grow in a lasting way when the broader economy does not. The debate, rather, is about how best to achieve rapid and poverty-reducing growth.
- Second, the new economy holds out enormous potential for accelerating global convergence - when information technology could help isolated and far-flung nations overcome the barriers of time and space, and advances in biotechnology offer fresh promise for overcoming the scourge of infectious disease. But when half of the world's population has yet to use a telephone, and 40 percent of African adults cannot read, there is perhaps an equal chance that technology will speed further divergence. We will not see that more inclusive outcome without concerted public action.
- Third, the crucial factor in achieving successful global development in the years ahead will be national policies in the developing countries themselves. In this new global economy, countries will shape their own destinies. And the international community cannot want growth and reform in any country more than a nation's own government and its people do.

Achieving successful global development in this context is an immensely difficult and complex challenge, and none of us has all the answers today. But I believe that we need to form a new global consensus embracing the major elements that are essential to success.

Five of the core elements relate to what countries do - and five to the actions and policies of the international community.

Too often, in recent years, the debate about international development assistance has been paralyzed by a stand off between two extreme views:

- The first is the view that all that stands between the poorest countries and rapid economic growth is inadequate international financial support.
- The second is the view that the countries' problems stem only from a lack of commitment in the countries themselves - a failing that no amount of external support will fix.

It is time that we recognized that both views are right - and both views are wrong.

On the one hand, no country will succeed without the right policies in place. Tempting as it is to believe that just providing support to governments and letting them use it as they see fit is enough, the overwhelming lesson of history is that it isn't so. Indeed, the economic history of Nigeria, Venezuela, Zambia and others with abundant natural resources offer concrete examples of the dangers of external finance without good policies. All too often, natural resource windfalls have flowed into palaces, corruption, and Swiss bank accounts, producing little or no tangible benefit for a nation's people. The lesson is that support needs to be targeted to countries and policies with a proven capacity to deliver results, and that conditions are appropriate when assistance is provided.

At the same time, those who preach self-reliance need to recognize that the most committed governments in the poorest countries today face problems that they will not come close to addressing without major outside support. And we all must face up to the fact that there are high return investments in growth and poverty reduction that are not being pursued in the poorest countries today, at tremendous human and economic cost, because of a lack of official resources.

Increasing the quantity, as well as the quality, of global development assistance must be a global humanitarian imperative at a time when the average per capita health budget in sub-Saharan Africa will barely cover the cost of a tse-tse fly trap, yet net official transfers per capita to Africa are now more than one third lower, in real terms, than they were in 1990.

We recognize that this is a challenge that the world's richest country has a particular responsibility to confront. The US continues to be one of the largest contributors to the global development effort and the largest market for developing country goods. But Americans should not be satisfied with what we are now doing. Our defense budget last year was more than a $100 billion lower in real terms than it was in 1989 - but rather than reinvest a portion of this dividend in forward defense of US interests through foreign assistance, we spent 20 percent less, in real terms, on our foreign operations in 1999 than we did on average during the 1980s.

The global stake in successful economic development has never been greater. There have never been greater technological opportunities to promote convergence than there are today. And for all the arguments that rage, there is probably more agreement on the right way forward, both nationally and internationally, than ever before. The question really is whether internationally we will have the will to do what can be done. That is why I am so honored to have had the opportunity to participate in this forum of the UN today. Thank you.
