---
title: DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY WILLIAM SCHUERCH DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY STEVEN RADELET TESTIMONY BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON DOMESTIC AND INTERNATIONAL MONETARY POLICY
date: 2000-05-25
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls660
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-660

Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Waters, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee, we welcome the opportunity to testify today on the United States Government's efforts to help Nigeria consolidate democracy, restore a functioning economy, and promote sustainable economic growth.

The events in Nigeria over the last year and a half are the source of considerable hope for the future. The inauguration of President Obasanjo on May 29, 1999, was a clear success in the country's political transition and may represent a turning point in the country's history. There are other signs of democratic institutions taking hold including the increased freedom of the press and a reconstituted parliament. The expectations of the Nigerian people for visible and rapid improvement in their economic prospects now present an enormous challenge for the new government.

While the ultimate responsibility for meeting these expectations must lie with the Nigerians themselves, the Administration fully recognizes the importance of supporting Nigeria's return to democracy after almost two decades of military rule and of assisting its efforts to put the country on the path to sustainable and broadly-shared economic growth. Reflecting this importance, Secretary of State Albright has named Nigeria as one of the four key transitional democracies in the world.

Nigeria's vital leadership role in supporting regional stability through substantial peacekeeping efforts over the last decade demonstrates its importance to the region as well as its role in furthering US goals of stability for western Africa. Recently, the Nigerian military forces - as the key player in the Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group or ECOMOG - have been central to international efforts to support peace in Liberia and Sierra Leone.

To introduce a more detailed discussion of the foundations necessary for sustained economic growth, Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Africa, the Middle East and South Asia Steve Radelet will begin with some comments regarding the broad challenges facing Nigeria.

I will then discuss the role of the international financial institutions (IFIs) in supporting Nigeria's efforts to accelerate growth and fundamentally reduce poverty. Though our main focus today is not on the US bilateral program, my testimony will also touch on the important role that these activities will play in our efforts to support Nigeria. I will conclude by addressing the role of the Paris Club in helping Nigeria with its significant debt problems.

**Nigeria's Importance** Mr. Chairman, Nigeria's importance in Africa is clear. Home to about one in five Africans and the second largest economy in Sub-Saharan Africa, there is no doubt that Nigeria's success or failure will have ramifications far beyond its borders. Economic and political stability in Africa's most populous nation is a crucial component in our Administration's broader efforts to address the many challenges currently confronting Africa.

Nigeria is also an important bilateral economic partner of the United States, as our second largest trading partner on the continent. The United States imports $4 billion of goods from Nigeria, almost entirely petroleum. In 1998, Nigeria was the 5thlargest crude oil exporter to the US, providing roughly 8% of total US crude oil imports.

Nigeria is in a position to play a strong continental and global role because it benefits from a large population of energetic, educated, and entrepreneurial people, as well as from an abundance of natural resources. Most apparent is Nigeria's oil wealth, which generated roughly $12 billion in export revenues in 1999. Nigeria also ranks among the top ten countries in the world in proven gas reserves, though exploration remains in the early stages. And while the agriculture sector is only a shadow of its former self, Nigeria in the past has been a significant producer and exporter of rubber, palm oil, cotton, cocoa, and food crops, and could be again.

**Economic Challenges** The challenges are as impressive as the potential. Economic growth rates averaged only 1.2% per year from 1982-95, less than half the population growth rate of 2.9%. Nigeria's social indicators are only slightly above the sub-Saharan average and paint a portrait of a persistently impoverished country. Only one of two Nigerians has access to safe water and adult illiteracy exceeds forty percent. In addition, according to a USAID survey, AIDS prevalence rates have reached an estimated 5.4% of the adult population, a threshold considered by experts as marking the takeoff point for a health problem of epidemic proportions.

One factor behind the low growth rates is the lack of economic diversification in Nigeria. Currently, oil provides about 90% of foreign exchange earnings and 80% of budgetary revenues. This over-dependence on oil, and the resulting distortion of the country's financial and foreign exchange position, has contributed directly to the decline of the agriculture sector and left Nigeria excessively vulnerable to price fluctuations. Moreover, oil-dominated export earnings have failed to keep pace with rising import and development costs.

The nascent natural gas industry provides some scope for partial diversification, but Nigeria must also target labor intensive sectors that provide greater opportunities for job creation.

**Establishing the Foundations for Sustained Economic Growth** The enormous challenges confronting the Nigerian economy require a robust, comprehensive and sustained reform effort. Let me touch on six key components I see as necessary to provide the foundation for sustained economic growth.** Reform Efforts to Date** The Obasanjo Government has already begun to address these challenges and has made notable progress. The Government's early efforts to restore macroeconomic discipline are demonstrated by the increases in growth from 1.9% in 1999 to an estimated 3.9% in 2000, a rapid deceleration of inflation to an estimated 5.8% in 2000, recovery in international reserves after a precipitous fall under the Abacha regime, and the unification of the exchange rate. As a former Chairman of the Advisory Board of Transparency International, President Obasanjo has also placed a high priority on fighting corruption and promoting good governance. The Government has already taken steps to open the democratic process, including efforts to provide more details on spending and revenue in its annual budgets and to make substantial reductions in off-budget spending.

Improvements in these areas have helped lay the foundation for increased engagement, both with the US, as part of our bilateral assistance program, and with the international community, including the multilateral financial institutions.

I will now turn to my colleague, Bill Schuerch, who will address various means by which we are currently engaging Nigeria to help support long-term growth and development.

**Bilateral Assistance** The United States Government has identified $107 million in bilateral assistance for FY2000. This figure represents a substantial increase over FY1999 levels of roughly $38 million. The large increase represents the Administration's current commitment to assist Nigeria in its return to democracy and a market economy.

The FY2000 funds include $93 million from USAID - targeted at health and education, privatization efforts, anti-corruption reforms, fiscal discipline, poverty reduction, and the promotion of the private sector, especially in agribusiness and other labor-intensive activities. Of this total, $26 million is targeted for HIV/AIDS and other health-related programs and $10 million for education programs. The additional amounts include anti-narcotics programs.

Further, the State Department and Department of Defense are working to help Nigeria rebuild and professionalize a military that had been devastated through neglect and corruption. After the return to civilian government, the USG lifted sanctions that had prohibited the export of all military goods and services to Nigeria. This year, the State Department is allocating $600,000 for IMET (International Military Education and Training) - up from $425,000 in 1999 - and $10 million in Foreign Military Funds. The Foreign Military Funds will help reestablish the effectiveness of military training facilities and help restore the Nigerian fleet of C-130 aircraft to support regional peacekeeping operations. Such programs will help to re-professionalize Nigeria's military and to support making it accountable to elected civilian leadership.

I should note that the Administration's proposed Vaccines Initiative also would assist Nigeria in improving its childhood immunization coverage, which is now one of the lowest in the world at about 45%; over time, it should also assist in combating epidemics through the development of new vaccines for HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis.

**IMF Assistance** In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Nigeria had three one-year programs. Since early 1992, Nigeria has not had a financing relationship with the Fund. The IMF has been working actively to support reform since the change in government in 1998. Last year, Nigeria agreed to a series of reforms under an informal "Staff-Monitored" program that was to help set the foundation for broader reform efforts. While there were implementation problems with this program, the progress that the Nigerians have made in the last year has provided the basis for negotiations of a formal program.

The Government of Nigeria and the IMF are now in the advanced stages of negotiating a one-year program, which targets many of the fundamental challenges Mr. Radelet has already addressed including better infrastructure, privatization, improved governance, and fiscal control. The Nigerian government has already made substantial progress towards reaching agreement on this program by adopting key reforms. As the press has reported, discussions are now focused on the budget. We look forward to conclusion of these negotiations.

**MDB Assistance** The World Bank has not made a new loan in Nigeria since 1993 when lending was cut off because of poor implementation, continued deterioration in governance, and President Abacha's embargo on all foreign borrowing. The Bank continued to supervise ongoing projects through the 1990s. The Bank began to re-engage following the change in government in 1998.

The World Bank Board endorsed this month an interim strategy that proposes that approximately $900 million of concessional resources be made available over three years. The $600 million project component of the Bank's lending program will be focused in areas crucial to immediate poverty alleviation such as primary education, community rural development, and AIDS and health-related systems.

Additionally, the World Bank's initial assistance strategy is heavily weighted with diagnostic work to adequately assess institutional and economic management capacities both at the macro level and in key sectors. Technical assistance will be provided to support the country's privatization program. At the heart of the Bank's near-term strategy is an Economic Management Capacity Building Project that aims to strengthen key economic institutions of government, particularly those dealing with the formulation, implementation, monitoring, and accounting of the budget; a $55 million primary education project; a $60 million community rural development project, and a $100 million micro-watershed and environment project.

When an IMF program is adopted, the World Bank and the African Development Bank will be prepared to propose a balance-of-payments loan in the range of $300-$450 million. The World Bank will provide between $200-$300 million and the AfDB will provide around $100-$150 million to support the government's Poverty Reduction Fund, which is designed to facilitate the monitoring of key development projects, and better target the most immediate developmental needs. We will be closely monitoring the development of this project to ensure that it is structured with appropriate safeguards.

The African Development Bank is in the midst of preparing its country assistance strategy for Nigeria. While plans are still very much in the preliminary stages, its efforts will be closely linked to those of the World Bank, particularly in establishing and supporting projects under the Poverty Reduction Fund, and providing the balance of payments loan. In all, the AfDB program would total approximately $200 million.

I should emphasize the importance that we attach to ensuring that assistance is provided in the context of strong performance. We believe that the Nigerian Government understands this, and as Mr. Radelet and I have highlighted, work is well under-way by the Nigerian Government and the IFIs to support a more active program of IFI assistance going forward.

**Debt** One of President Obasanjo's priorities is to reduce Nigeria's significant external indebtedness. Nigeria has over $30 billion in loans due to official bilateral ($26 billion), private sector ($3 billion) and multilateral ($4 billion) creditors. Much of this debt, over $20 billion, is in arrears because Nigeria's previous government stopped paying its official bilateral creditors in the early 1990s. This action, combined with the fact that private creditors were being paid during the same time, has not made President Obasanjo's task easier.

The Administration recognizes Nigeria's debt difficulties as well as this Committee's interest in Nigerian debt relief. We continue to work to address these issues - both within the US government and with other creditor countries. However, there is little international support for Nigerian debt reduction at this time. One reason for this is that, based on HIPC criteria and the best available estimates of Nigeria's debt profile, Nigeria would not qualify for HIPC debt relief even if it were included in the set of countries covered by the program. Nevertheless, we recognize that Nigeria is not in a position to pay the roughly $3.5 billion that is due in debt service in FY2000.

To address this problem, the United States is encouraging a generous interim rescheduling of Nigeria's debt in the Paris Club. While we have encountered strong resistance by other creditors that want a significant "down payment" by Nigeria prior to any rescheduling, we have made enough progress to reduce creditor demands to a payment level more consistent with Nigeria's development needs and payment capacity. We expect Nigeria's 2000 external debt service payments to be roughly $1.5 billion. This amount, which represents about 10% of exports or 11% of revenue, was the amount included in the original budget proposed by President Obasanjo. If ultimately agreed by other creditors, this would represent significant cash flow savings that Nigeria could use to support programs to help reduce poverty and promote economic growth.

We have worked with the Nigerians to reinforce the importance of sound economic policies. It is our view that debt relief should be provided in the context of economic reforms and sufficient assurance that the resources it provides will be used effectively.

**Conclusion** In sum, the challenges facing the Nigerian people are immense. The future course of economic and political development depends primarily on Nigerian leadership and decision-making. We believe we have a unique opportunity at this time to support the transition underway in Nigeria. A strong and stable Nigeria is in the interest of the Nigerian people, the rest of Africa, and the United States. Thank you. We would now welcome any questions.
