---
title: TREASURY SECRETARY LAWRENCE H. SUMMERS REMARKS ON THE IMPORTANCE OF PASSING SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION CREDITS
date: 2000-09-20
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls890
---
*(Archived Content)*



FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-890



First of all let me thank Representative Rangel and Representative Johnson for sponsoring this critical measure to improve the condition of America's schools. I would also like to thank the nearly 230 Congressional co-sponsors who have treated this important legislation in the bipartisan spirit that it deserves. Last week, the President called on Congress to fully enact his education budget proposals. This measure is an important part of those proposals. By investing more in our schools, we can help ensure that our children receive the high quality education that they deserve.



As Chairman Greenspan has so often emphasized, in the new knowledge-based economy, success depends on how much you know, not on how much you can lift. The most critical investment we can make in the future of our economy is therefore to ensure that all our children receive a decent education. And that, first and foremost, means investing in our schools.



There is a lot that is very hard about education policy. There are questions of figuring out what types of courses and what types of instruction are most effective in helping children to learn. Equally, there are very important questions of standards and accountability and how teachers can best be motivated and compensated. These are profound issues that we must all confront so that we can maximize the quality of our educational system. While none of us can know all the answers, it is important that we work together to reach agreement.



But there are some questions where there should be no doubt whatsoever about the answer. And this legislation is an important step forward in providing the right response. If our children are our most important resource and schools are the most important program affecting our children, then 11 million American children should not be attending schools that lack proper ventilation and environmental controls.



The richest, most powerful, country in the world can afford to keep all its schools in a reasonable condition for its children. Yet today, one in three schools are in bad shape while three out of four require some kind of repair. Research shows what common sense would suggest: when kids are able to learn in decent facilities that are decently maintained that show respect for what they are doing, they learn much more and they learn better than children who are deprived of such basic facilities.



At a moment when America's economy is stronger than it has ever been, American children should not be learning their lessons in classrooms that were once closets. Nor should there be any school in America where lunch starts at 9.45am because of lack of capacity. Schools should not be like factories operating on multiple shifts with some kids starting their school day at 4pm.



America is better than this. We can afford to do better. We know how to fix windows in schools. We know how to make sure that every school has the kind of facilities that are available at the schools to which many of us here are lucky enough to send our children.



My children are fortunate in attending an excellent public school with beautiful facilities. That is an option that should be there for every American child. And that is something we as a country can provide for every American child if we have the will. It is also something we can surely afford as a nation.



This legislation will provide the resources that will enable state and local authorities to improve our education facilities by providing $24.8 billion in tax credit bonds to modernize and construct 6,000 schools across America. The President believes it is of critical importance that Congress passes the bill. It is clear for the support of this measure that a majority of Representatives share this sentiment. Let me finally reiterate my thanks to those of you who have provided your support to this important legislation. I look forward to continuing to work toward passage of this measure. Thank you.
