---
title: TESTIMONY BEFORE THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE TREASURY SECRETARY LAWRENCE H. SUMMERS
date: 2000-02-08
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls390
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-390

Mr. Chairman, Senator Moynihan, Members of the Committee, it is a pleasure to speak with you today about the President's FY 2001 budget. Let me start by thanking this Committee for your hard work in helping bring about the enviable position in which we now find ourselves.

At the outset of this Administration, the President established a three-pronged economic strategy based on strong fiscal discipline, investing in people, and engaging in the international economy. Partly as a consequence of that strategy we have achieved the first back-to-back unified budget surpluses in more than 40 years.

It is no coincidence that this month the US economy also achieved the longest expansion on record. This historic accomplishment is a tribute to the hard work and entrepreneurial qualities of our workers, businesses and farmers. But without the budget agreements of 1993 and 1997 between the President and Congress, the economic expansion would not have been as impressive or as enduring.

Last year's surplus of $124 billion was the largest in our history. Even using conservative assumptions, the budget will move still further into the black this year. By the end of September, we expect that Federal debt held by the public will be $2.4 trillion less than was projected for that date in 1992. This represents scarce national savings that have been freed up for private sector investment in the productive economy: in American businesses, workers and homes.

In 1992, the Federal budget posted a record deficit of $290 billion - almost 5 percent of our gross domestic product. Since then we have achieved not only a unified budget surplus - comprising both the operating budget and the Social Security budget - but also a small surplus in our on-budget account. In other words, for the first time since 1960 all of last year's Social Security surplus was used to improve the government's balance sheet.

This dramatic improvement in our fiscal situation reflects some hard choices. Federal spending has fallen below 19 percent of GDP, a sharp drop from the 22 percent level that prevailed when the Administration came into office. And we have reduced the Federal civilian payroll by more than one-sixth in that period, a reduction of 377,000 full-time equivalent employees.

As a result of this discipline, we are now in a position to eliminate the debt held by the public by 2013, on a net basis. Paying down the remaining $3.6 trillion of Federal debt will help to intensify the remarkably positive interaction that we have witnessed between the budget and the economy over the last several years, whereby what was once a vicious cycle of more debt, higher interest rates, a weaker economy and still more debt has been replaced with a virtuous circle of declining debt, lower interest rates, and a stronger economy, in turn producing still less debt, further downward pressure on interest rates, and stronger growth.

As a result, unemployment is at its lowest rate in 30 years, more than 20 million new jobs have been created, productivity growth has increased even this far into the expansion, home ownership rates are at an all-time high, and real wages are rising across the board including for those at the bottom of the income ladder.

At the same time, our fiscal position also provides us with a rare opportunity to focus on crucial national priorities. Let me set out the five basic objectives of this budget before discussing each item in turn.

- Reducing Federal debt to safeguard our economic expansion.

- Meeting the needs of an aging society by laying the foundations for the secure retirement of the baby boom generation.

- Providing new incentives through the tax system to strengthen our communities and encourage people to work and save more.

- Pursuing well targeted initiatives that invest in health, education and other national priorities.

- Redoubling our commitment to opening markets and sustaining American leadership in order to bolster international economic opportunities for America and strengthen our national security in an uncertain world.
**OVERVIEW OF THE FY2001 BUDGET I. Safeguarding Our Economy by Reducing Federal Debt**For decades, Treasury's discussions with its Borrowing Advisory Committee centered on how we could finance growing budget deficits and whether the market would have the capacity to absorb the huge volumes of government debt that we needed to sell. In this new era of rising projected budget surpluses, our discussions now focus on how we can maintain liquidity in the market while reducing the volume of debt outstanding.

According to OMB and Treasury projections, this challenge will become even more apparent in the years ahead. Until now, debt reduction has been accomplished solely by retiring Treasury securities when they fall due. But from now on, we will have another tool available to help us manage the process of reducing the debt held by the public - namely, the ability to buy debt back from the public that has not yet matured. Using this tool, we can both reduce debt and bolster liquidity in our key benchmark issues. In the April to June quarter of this year, we expect that Treasury's net borrowing will result in a record pay down of $152 billion worth of bonds. This puts us on track to pay down more debt this year than in 1998 and 1999 combined.

As I have explained, under the President's proposals we will eliminate the debt held by the public by 2013 on a net basis. This will generate substantial further gains for the American economy. Reducing Federal debt functions like a tax cut in two respects. First, it removes the burden of interest and principal payments from the American taxpayer. Second, it maintains downward pressure on interest rates, and thereby helps reduce payments on home mortgages, car loans and other forms of consumer credit. We estimate that a 1-percentage point reduction in interest rates results in roughly a $250 billion reduction in mortgage interest expense over a decade.

Debt reduction also creates fiscal space, widening the range of choices available to us, and giving us greater capacity to respond to unforeseen problems. Today, the Federal Government is spending more than $200 billion a year on interest payments that would be eliminated under our proposals. The President proposes that resources not paid in interest be used to help ease the burden of the Social Security and Medicare costs that will arise once the baby-boom generation begins to retire.

**II. Meeting the Needs of an Aging Society**As we create more fiscal space through continued fiscal discipline, we face a fundamental choice about how best to utilize that space. In this context, it is a vital objective of this budget to improve our ability to shoulder this country's obligations to its seniors.

Let me focus on two central elements: strengthening Social Security and modernizing Medicare.

***1. Extending the solvency of Social Security to 2050 and beyond***

It is a central tenet of our strategy that we will use all of the surpluses from Social Security to improve the government's net financial position. Compared to an alternative scenario, in which we merely balance the unified budget, the President's framework generates an increasing amount of savings on interest that would otherwise be paid to holders of the debt. Beginning in 2011, we propose to transfer these interest savings into the Social Security trust funds. These transfers would extend the solvency of the trust funds until 2050.

At the core of the President's proposal is a high level of fiscal discipline. In the Administration's framework, every dollar added to the trust funds is backed by a dollar's worth of pay of the debt held by the public, and hence a dollar's worth of contribution to national savings. These are serious steps, and constitute important preparation for the retirement of the baby boom generation.

In line with private sector practice, we also propose to invest a sensible and measured proportion of the trust funds in the equity market with the safeguard that such investment be limited to 15 percent of the value of the trust funds. This would further extend the solvency of the trust funds to 2054.

**2. Modernizing Medicare**Since Medicare was launched 35 years ago, accessible and affordable health care has dramatically improved the lives of Americans over the age of 65. But there is now a very broad consensus that it is time to reform Medicare to meet the challenges of the new century.

*By extending competition*

The President put forward a detailed Medicare reform proposal last year, and he remains committed to enacting comprehensive reform in this Congress. A key element of this proposal is the move to full price and quality competition between traditional fee-for-service Medicare and managed-care plans.

By letting consumers realize most of the cost savings from choosing more efficient health plans, genuine competition will give all health plans a strong incentive to deliver the most value for money. At the same time, our proposal would ensure that seniors who move to lower-cost plans do so out of choice and not because of financial coercion. We look forward to working with the Members of this Committee to achieve these important objectives.

*By providing coverage for prescription drugs*

A second central element of Medicare reform is a voluntary prescription drug benefit that is affordable to all Medicare beneficiaries. Drug treatment has become an increasingly important part of modern health care, and no one would design a Medicare program today that excluded prescription drug coverage. Yet, roughly 3 out of 5 Medicare beneficiaries do not have dependable drug coverage today, and a majority of the uninsured have incomes greater than 150 percent of poverty. The Administration's proposal would provide a 50 percent subsidy for all seniors who choose to purchase the new Medicare drug benefit, with additional subsidies for lower-income seniors. The budget also includes a reserve fund of $35 billion for 2006 through 2010 to be used to design protections for beneficiaries with extremely high drug spending.

*And by extending the solvency of Medicare*

A third aspect of responsible Medicare reform is the addition of new resources into the Hospital Trust Fund. In the coming decades we expect to see a doubling in the number of Medicare beneficiaries, and continued advances in the ability of modern medicine to improve the length and quality of seniors' lives. We cannot meet the rising future demands on Medicare through our structural reforms alone. But by enacting the combination of reforms and transfers in the President's budget, the projected solvency of the Medicare program could be extended to 2025.

III. Using Tax Cuts to Strengthen Our Communities

The President's budget creates room for prudent and targeted tax cuts totaling $250 billion on a net basis over the next decade and $350 billion on a gross basis. These tax initiatives would advance a broad range of national priorities, including: reducing poverty and stimulating the creation of small businesses in our deprived communities; strengthening incentives to work and to save; and making it easier for families to care for chronically ill relatives. The proposals would also close unfair tax loopholes and eliminate tax shelters.

Let me highlight briefly some of the most important tax cut proposals in the President's budget.

*Retirement Savings*

Almost one in five elderly Americans has no income other than Social Security: two-thirds rely on Social Security for half or more of their income. Half of all working Americans have no pension coverage at all through their current job. It is very clear that steps need to be taken to help Americans take greater responsibility for their own financial security in retirement, and new incentives should be targeted to moderate and lower-income working families.

The President proposes to address this situation by creating a new, broad-based savings account, Retirement Savings Accounts. These accounts would give 76 million lower- and middle-income Americans the opportunity to build wealth and save for their retirement.

Under our plan, individuals could choose whether to participate, on a strictly voluntary basis, either through a retirement plan sponsored by their employer, or through a special stand-alone account at a financial institution. The employer or the financial institution would match each individual's contribution, and then recover the cost of the match from the Federal government in the form of a tax credit.

Individuals could contribute up to $1,000 per year. Low-income individuals would qualify for a two-for-one match on the first $100 contributed, and a dollar-for-dollar match on additional contributions. Higher income participants could qualify for a 20-percent match, in addition to the tax incentives that apply to pension or IRA contributions. A person who participated in this savings program for their entire career could accumulate well over two hundred thousand dollars for his or her retirement.

In addition, the President proposes to make small employers eligible for new tax credits to help them set up or improve their retirement plans. Related proposals include measures to increase pension security and portability, and to improve disclosure to workers. Overall, the cost of these initiatives to expand retirement savings would total $77 billion over ten years.

*Helping Working Families *

The Earned Income Tax Credit has proved one of the most effective means of rewarding work and lifting people out of poverty. In 1998 alone, the EITC raised the income of 4.3 million working people above the poverty level. But many families still remain in poverty. The President proposes to help more families work their way out of poverty by increasing the earned income tax credit for the larger families that are most apt to be poor and relieving the marriage penalty under the EITC. The increases in the EITC would total $24 billion over the next ten years.

Under the budget plan we would also reduce the marriage tax penalty, strengthen work incentives, and cut taxes for the 70 percent of families who claim the standard deduction. To address the marriage penalty in a targeted way, the President proposes to make the standard deduction for two-earner married couples twice the standard deduction for singles. In 2005, when it is fully phased in, this proposal would raise the standard deduction for two-earner married couples by $2,150. Starting in 2005, the proposal would also simplify and reduce taxes for middle income taxpayers by increasing the standard deduction for single-earner married couples by $500 and for singles by $250. The proposal would make the child and dependent care tax credit refundable and raise the maximum credit rate to 50 percent.

*Revitalizing our Communities.*.

By expanding the New Markets tax credit the budget would help spur $15 billion in new investment for businesses in inner cities and poor rural areas. The budget also proposes to extend and expand incentives for businesses to invest in empowerment zones.

*Health*

Last year the President proposed a tax credit that compensated families for the cost of looking after chronically ill relatives. But at $1,000, the credit was insufficient compensation for the rising burden that these families face. The President FY2001 proposal triples the credit to $3,000. We also propose to provide tax credits for workers between jobs who purchase COBRA coverage from their old employers.

*Education*

The budget proposes to save taxpayers $30 billion over ten years through the College Opportunity Tax Cut. When fully phased in, this new tax incentive would give families the option of taking a tax deduction or claiming a 28 per cent credit for up to $10,000 of higher education costs. This would provide up to $2,800 in tax relief to millions of families who are now struggling to afford the costs of post-secondary education. We also put forward a tax credit to help state and local governments build and renovate their schools.

*Tax Simplification and Fairness*

Although the Alternative Minimum Tax was originally intended to ensure that high-income taxpayers could not use tax breaks to avoid income tax altogether, we recognize that it is increasingly eating into the take-home pay of middle-income taxpayers, especially those with large families. We propose to redress this problem by allowing taxpayers to deduct all of their exemptions for dependents against AMT. By 2010 when it is fully phased-in, this change would halve the number of taxpayers affected by the AMT.

*Corporate Shelters and Tax Havens*

The proliferation of corporate tax shelters presents a growing and unacceptable level of abusive tax avoidance that reduces government receipts and consequently raises the tax burden on compliant taxpayers. Corporate tax shelters breed disrespect for the tax system -- both by those who participate in the tax shelter market and by those who perceive unfairness. A perception that well-advised corporations can and do avoid their legal tax liabilities by engaging in these tax-engineered transactions may cause a race to the bottom.

The President's FY 2001 Budget again contains a comprehensive approach to addressing this problem. This approach is intended to change the dynamics on both the supply and demand side of this 'market,' making it a less attractive one for all participants -- 'merchants' of abusive tax shelters, their customers, and those who facilitate these tax-engineered transactions. The main elements of the legislation include: requirements aimed at substantially improving the disclosure of corporate tax shelter activities, provisions to raise the penalty where there is substantial understatement of tax owed; and the codification of the economic substance doctrine. Enactment of corporate tax shelter legislation, combined with the efforts of the restructured IRS, will go along way towards deterring abusive transactions before they occur, and uncover and stop these transactions when they do take place.

Another area that raises similar concerns is the growing use of tax havens. These jurisdictions, through strict bank secrecy and other means, facilitate tax avoidance and evasion. Curbing this harmful tax competition should help businesses to compete on a level playing field and encourage investment growth and jobs. Our budget includes several provisions intended to reduce the attractiveness of tax havens and to increase access to information about activities in tax havens.

*Other Provisions*

There are a number of other important proposals that I would like to mention. These include: incentives to increase philanthropic donations; tax credits aimed at bridging the digital divide, by encouraging investment in technology in deprived communities, and measures to help reduce pollution and emissions of greenhouse gases.

**IV. Investing in Health, Education and Other National Priorities**The spending proposals in the President's budget are based on two fundamental principles.

The first principle is that we use realistic projections of the level of spending needed to maintain core government functions. To meet this requirement, we begin with a current services baseline under which discretionary spending is held constant on an inflation-adjusted basis.

Our budget policy would maintain defense spending at this baseline and reduce non-defense discretionary spending slightly below it, meaning that existing domestic programs would need to be trimmed by more than enough to finance new initiatives. In 1999, non-defense discretionary spending was a smaller share of GDP than at any point in at least 40 years; under our policy, it would represent a yet smaller share over the coming decade. Moreover, total outlays as a proportion of GDP would decline in 2001 and they would continue to decline on this basis for the rest of the decade.

The second fundamental principle of the President's spending proposals is to focus on critical national priorities, including health care, education, law enforcement, and technology. By focusing our initiatives in these and other key areas, we can meet people's needs in a fiscally disciplined way.

Let me briefly summarize our proposals in these four areas.

*HealthCare*

The President has proposed a bold initiative to reverse the disturbing increase in the number of Americans without health insurance. Through the combination of targeted spending proposals and tax incentives, we can expand health coverage to millions of uninsured Americans.

A central part of this initiative is an expansion of the State Children's Health Insurance Program, known as S-CHIP, which was introduced two years ago with broad bipartisan support. In the FY2001 budget we would build on the success of this program by extending it to cover the*parents*of eligible children, most of whom are uninsured. Another important element of this initiative is providing a Medicare buy-in option for people close to the Medicare eligibility age. This year, to make this option more affordable, our budget includes a tax credit to offset some of the premium.

*Education*

Education is another key priority in the President's budget, as has been true since the beginning of this Administration. For next year we are proposing an additional $1 billion for the Head Start program and almost $150 million for Early Head Start, which would put us within reach of serving one million children by 2002. We are also proposing sufficient funding to take us almost halfway to the President's goal of hiring 100,000 new teachers in order to reduce class sizes.

*Law Enforcement*

Turning to law enforcement, the budget includes significant new resources to enforce our nation's gun laws. Last Friday we released a report from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms showing that 1- percent of gun dealers account for well over half of all crime guns traced last year. The information from gun tracing will help us target our enforcement efforts, but we also need more agents and inspectors at the ATF and more prosecutors - and our budget will provide them.

At the same time we are requesting funds that would pay for recruiting and training of 50,000 new police officers, and funds that would strengthen the National Money Laundering Strategy. Money laundering is a growing international problem, and we need this budget allocation to strengthen U.S. Leadership in fighting this problem.

*Technology and the Environment *

Another important national priority must be investment in the science and technology that will spur economic growth and improve people's lives in the 21stcentury. The President's budget includes a nearly $3 billion increase in crucial investments, including a $1 billion increase in funding for biomedical research for the National Institutes of Health and a rise in funding for the National Science Foundation that is double the previous largest increase. These investments will enable Americans to continue to lead the world in many areas of science and technology, including biomedical research, nano-technology, and clean energy.

The budget also contains $42 billion for high-priority environmental and natural resource programs, an increase of $4 billion over last year's enacted level. This includes $1.4 billion in discretionary funding for the Land's Legacy initiative to expand and protect our open spaces, an additional $1.3 billion to support farm conservation, and an additional $770 million to help combat global climate change.

**American Leadership in the World As we enter this new century, it is crucial that we continue to learn the lessons of the last one by working to build an ever-widening circle of more prosperous and more open international economies. This enables us to enjoy the benefits of peace and the spread of our core values. And we benefit more directly in the millions of high-paying jobs that exports create and the competition and innovation that openness to imports can promote. In short, globalization is not a zero sum game but a win-win proposition for America and its trading partners. Let me outline several areas where we can strengthen this process while also enhancing our national security. ChinaOne of the President's top priorities this year is to seek Congressional approval for the agreement we negotiated to bring China into the World Trade Organization, by passing Permanent Normal Trading Relations with China as soon as possible. I firmly believe that China's entry into the WTO, under the terms of the trade agreement that we reached last November, is in our economic and national security interest. First, this is a good deal for American workers, farmers and businesses since the concessions all run one way, in our favor. Second, by integrating China into the rules-based world trading system, we will help promote reform within China and reduce the security threat that an isolated China can pose to America and the rest of the world. Mr. Chairman, we will need your support to prevail, and look forward to working with you on this issue in the weeks and months ahead. We also look forward to working with you to implement the Caribbean Basin, African Trade, and Balkans Trade Initiatives. Multilateral Development BanksObtaining adequate funding for U.S. participation in the MDBs remains a Treasury priority. Every dollar we contribute to the multilateral development banks leverages more than $45 in official lending to countries where more than three-quarters of the world's people live. These programs are the most effective tools we have for investing in the markets of tomorrow. This budget's request for $1.35 billion is $40 million less than we requested last year, yet it would fully cover our annual obligations to the MDBs as well as paying down some of our arrears to a global system that we were instrumental in creating. Highly Indebted Poor Countries InitiativeLet me thank Members of this Committee for your efforts in the FY2000 budget to provide broader, deeper and faster debt relief to the world's poorest and most heavily indebted nations. As a result, progress has been made. Writing off debts owed by countries that will never be able to repay them is sound financial accounting. It is also a moral imperative at a time when a new generation of African leaders is trying to open up their economies. The President is asking for an additional $210 million this year and $600 million over the next three years to support multilateral and bilateral debt relief for countries under the Highly Indebted Poor Countries initiative. In doing so he is asking Congress to finish the enormously important work we began last fall. VaccinesThe budget also contains requests that would help fulfill the President's Millennium Initiative for vaccines. By allocating $50m to the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization, we could save many children's lives and at the same time help protect the health of American citizens. The President has also proposed a new tax credit that would help stimulate development of vaccines for malaria, HIV-AIDS and tuberculosis. Concluding Remarks I began my remarks today by focusing on the link between fiscal discipline and the performance of our economy over the last seven years. Having worked hard to help bring us to the remarkable economic moment that we are now enjoying, the Members of this Committee know well the value to our economy and our country of further paying down the national debt held by the public. If we can act to reduce the debts we bequeath to our children, while continuing to fund our obligations to seniors and pursuing the vital purpose of making the economy work for all our people and communities, then we can maximize the extraordinary opportunities with which we are now presented. I look forward to working together with this Committee and others in Congress to turn these high-class challenges into even higher-class solutions. Thank you. I would now be happy to respond to any questions that you might have.**
