---
title: TREASURY AND JUSTICE LAUNCH ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING GRANTS
date: 2000-06-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls694
---
*(Archived Content)*



FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-694



The Departments of Treasury and Justice today announced the Financial Crime-Free Communities Support (C-FIC) Anti-Money Laundering Grant Program that will provide seed capital for emerging state and local counter-money laundering enforcement efforts. Congress appropriated approximately $2.55 million for the C-FIC grant program this fiscal year.



Congress, particularly Senator Chuck Grassley and Congresswoman Nydia Velazquez, recognized that state and local law enforcement authorities are on the front line of our continuing fight against money laundering, said Deputy Secretary Eizenstat. The C-FIC grants will provide critical seed money for state and local programs that seek to address money laundering systems within their jurisdictions, and to build innovative approaches to money laundering control and enforcement.



The grants will be administered by the Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA) and awarded through a competitive peer review process to eligible state or local law enforcement agency or prosecutor's office. Grants will also be awarded to eligible applicants who are located within the High-Intensity Financial Crime Areas (HIFCA) -- New York/New Jersey, Los Angeles, San Juan and Southwest Border -- that were designated in the*National Money Laundering Strategy for 2000.*



The Bureau of Justice Assistance is very pleased to be working in partnership with Treasury on this important state and local assistance program, said BJA Director Nancy Gist. This program will enhance state and local coordination with and strongly complement Justice and Treasury's money laundering enforcement efforts at the Federal level.



For FY 2000, applicants may request funding of up to $300,000, which is expected to be the maximum federal contribution available for each award. Applications are due July 24, 2000.



Starting today, C-FIC information and application materials are available on BJA's web site at[http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJA](http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJA)Copies can also be obtained by calling the BJA Clearinghouse at 1-800-688-4252 or the U.S. Department of Justice Response Center at 1-800-421-6770.**
