---
title: TREASURY ANNOUNCEMENT OF REVISED AUCTION PARTICIPATION RULES FOR FOREIGN AND INTERNATIONAL MONETARY AUTHORITY ACCOUNTS
date: 2000-11-14
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/ls1015
---

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

LS-1015

The Treasury Department today announced a series of technical changes to the rules that apply to Foreign and International Monetary Authority (FIMA) account participation in Treasury auctions. These changes will facilitate the continued participation of FIMA accounts in the auction process, improve the liquidity and efficiency of the Treasury market, and allow the Treasury to better control the amount of funds raised at auction. These changes have been developed with the cooperation of the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and in consultation with major participants in the FIMA program. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York has already been working with major participants in the FIMA program to implement these new rules.



The Treasury plans to implement the following policy changes with respect to FIMA accounts, which will become effective on February 1, 2001:



We anticipate that larger FIMA accounts will participate in the competitive auction, where they will be subject to the same rules as all other competitive bidders. In particular, these rules include the following:



- Limits on competitive awards to a single bidder of no more than 35 percent of the public auction amount (including net long positions).
- Requirements to report net long positions under circumstances described in the Uniform Offering Circular.



Two current restrictions on all non-competitive bidders that also apply to FIMA accounts will continue to apply:



- Entities bidding non-competitively, including FIMA accounts, will continue to be prohibited from bidding competitively for their own account in the same auction; and
- Entities bidding non-competitively, including FIMA accounts, will be prohibited from holding when-issued, futures, or forward positions in the security being auctioned.



The size of our auctions will continue to be driven by Treasury's financing needs. We expect that our publicly announced auction amounts initially will increase by the amount that would have otherwise been anticipated to be raised through the add-ons related to FIMA accounts.



Background



FIMA accounts are primarily foreign central banks and governmental monetary entities, and also include non-governmental international monetary entities (such as the World Bank and IMF) and other authorized accounts. Treasury's current policy permits FIMA accounts to bid non-competitively and without limitation as to size in Treasury bill, note and bond auctions. FIMA non-competitive purchases of coupon securities, and portions of FIMA non-competitive purchases of bills, are treated as add-ons to Treasury's public auction amounts. This has resulted in significant issuance of Treasury securities above the publicly announced auction amounts.
