---
title: Secretary of the Treasury, Paul O'Neill, Meets with Hispanic Business Leaders to Discuss Trade Promotion Authority
date: 2001-07-30
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po513
---
*(Archived Content)*

[Spanish Version](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/po515)



Secretary of the Treasury Paul O'Neill and Ruben Barrales, Deputy Assistant to the President and Director for Intergovernmental Affairs at the White House, today met with Hispanic Business Leaders from throughout the US to discuss Trade Promotion Authority and emphasize the importance this authority has on formulating any sort of comprehensive free-trade agreements in the future.



It is important that President Bush has this negotiating tool to show other countries that the US is serious about pursuing free trade agreements, said O'Neill. The Executive Branch has not had TPA since 1994, and America's competitors have taken advantage in the interim. The rest of the world is moving forward and signing trade deals that exclude the United States.



O'Neill continued, Expanded trade is essential to America's continued prosperity. American companies lead the world and will find even greater success as trade barriers are reduced. Trade now represents more than one quarter of our economy. Millions of Americans work in trade related jobs that pay above-average wages and America's growth and prosperity will ultimately depend our access to the global economy.



The Hispanic business leaders come from various industries including high tech, construction, management, investment, and manufacturing companies. Attendees include the following individuals: Mr. Joseph Unanue, CEO, Goya Foods, Inc., Mr. Raul Romero, President/CEO, S&B Infrastructure, Ms. Dorene Dominguez, Vanir Construction, Ms. Sherii Sanchez, President, Acces, Inc.,Ms. Irma Elder, CEO, Elder Automotive, Ms. Teresa McBride, CEO, McBride, Mr. Joseph Samora, Vice-President GR, Case New Holland, Mr. Rudy Mulder, Chairman, Urban Trust Investments, Mr. Al Cardenas, Partner, Tew, Cardenas, Rebak, et. Al, and Mr. Raul Fernandez, CEO, Proxicom.
