---
title: 'WEEK SEVEN: TREASURY TO MAIL OUT 8.314 MILLION CHECKS ON FRIDAY'
date: 2001-08-30
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po581
---
*(Archived Content)*

Tomorrow the Treasury Department will send out 8.314 million advance payment checks to taxpayers for more than $3.527 billion in tax relief. These checks will be sent to taxpayers whose last two digits of their Social Security numbers are 60-69.

**Week Six (August 31) Social Security Numbers 60-69**

Number of Checks 8.314 million



Amount of Relief $3.527 billion

**Week Six (August 24) Social Security Numbers 50-59**

Number of Checks 8.266 million



Amount of Relief $3.550 billion

**Week Five (August 17) Social Security Numbers 40-49**

Number of Checks 8.219 million



Amount of Relief $3.483 billion

**Week Four (August 10) Social Security Numbers 30-39**

Number of Checks 8.210 million



Amount of Relief $3.467 billion

**Week Three (August 3) Social Security Numbers 20-29**

Number of Checks 8.185 million



Amount of Relief $3.468 billion

**Week Two (July 27) Social Security Numbers 10-19**

Number of Checks 8.133 million



Amount of Relief $3.443 billion

**Week One (July 20) Social Security Numbers 00-09**

Number of Checks 7.908 million



Amount of Relief $3.336 billion

**Seven Week Total**

Number of Checks 57.235 million



Amount of Relief $24.274 billion



The Treasury Department will announce every week the number of checks that are being mailed out for that week, and the amount of tax relief that is being sent to taxpayers. Checks will be mailed over a ten-week period, according to the last two digits of the taxpayers Social Security number. Notices from the Internal Revenue Service will inform taxpayers the amount of their check and when they should expect it have been mailed. Single taxpayers will get a check up to $300, head of household up to $500 and married couples filing jointly will get up to $600.



Because the Social Security number determines when checks are mailed, taxpayers may receive their checks at different times than their neighbors or other family members. On a joint return, the first number listed will set the mailout time.

**If the last two digits of your You should receive your check Social Security number are: the week of: : : **

00 - 09 July 23



10 - 19 July 30



20 - 29 August 6



30 - 39 August 13



40 - 49 August 20



50 - 59 August 27



60 - 69 September 3



70 - 79 September 10



80 - 89 September 17



90 - 99 September 24
