---
title: 'Secretary O''Neill comments on Status of Economic Stimulus Package'
date: 2001-12-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po851
---
*(Archived Content)*

*Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill made the following comments on the status of the economic stimulus package:*

On October 5, President Bush asked Congress to enact an economic security package. He asked very specifically for four provisions to strengthen our economy and create jobs: accelerating depreciation to stimulate investment, eliminating the corporate alternative minimum tax so employers hit by the downturn can retain and create jobs, providing relief to taxpayers who didn't get tax rebate checks this summer, and accelerating the already-enacted income tax rate cuts to put more money in people's pockets and help small businesses create and retain jobs. Today's unemployment numbers reinforce that we need a stimulus package to strengthen our economic recovery and put people back to work.

The House quickly passed a bill that included all the provisions the President requested. The legislative year is coming to an end, and still the Senate hasn't acted. First they failed to pass a bill. Now, after finally agreeing to a conference process to negotiate an economic stimulus, Senator Daschle has created an impossible hurdle for the negotiators. With his insistence that two-thirds of Senate Democrat's sign off on a stimulus package, Senator Daschle has rendered Senate Democrat conferees powerless in negotiating an agreement. Instead, 18 Senators can block any economic stimulus package, even one supported by a bipartisan majority.

Make no mistake, we remain committed to enacting a real economic security bill right now, without further delay or preconditions. By refusing to respond to the President's repeated call for action, Senator Daschle is delaying America's economic recovery and threatening Americans' job security.
