---
title: J. D. FOSTER JOINS OFFICE OF TAX POLICY AT THE TREASURY DEPARTMENT
date: 2001-03-28
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po117
---
*(Archived Content)*

On March 27, J. D. Foster joined the Office of Tax Policy as the Senior Advisor (Economics) to Assistant Secretary (Tax Policy) Mark Weinberger. In that position, he is responsible for providing policy analysis and advice on economic and tax policy issues.

J.D. is well known in the economic and political communities for his experience and knowledge in economic and tax policy analysis, stated Mark Weinberger. We look forward to the guidance and perspective he brings to our tax policy team.

Before coming to Treasury, Foster was the Legislative Director and Economic Counsel to the Honorable Philip M. Crane, Vice-Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee and prior to that Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Tax Foundation, a non-profit research and education organization. In that latter position, he was the author of many articles and editorials on public finance and tax policy especially relating to international tax policy, tax reform, capital formation, and education. Prior to joining the Tax Foundation, Foster provided economic counsel and advice to the President's Council of Economic Advisers, Senators Don Nickles, Steve Symms, and Bill Armstrong, and the Institute for Research on the Economics of Taxation.

Foster is a graduate of the University of Colorado holding a B.A. in Economics and a B.A. in Mathematics. He received his M.A. in Economics from Brown University and his Ph.D. in Economics from Georgetown University.
