---
title: G7 PRESS ANNOUNCEMENTS
date: 2001-10-04
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po657
---
*(Archived Content)*

**PRE-G7 PRESS CONFERENCETreasury Secretary Paul O'Neill will host a press conference in advance of this weekend's meeting of the Group of Seven Finance Ministers in Washington. The press conference will take place on Friday, October 5, 2001 at 11:00 AM in the Diplomatic Reception Room in the Treasury Building located on 15 th & F Street, NW. NOTE: This press conference will only be open to members of the media currently holding Treasury, White House and State Department passes. G7 PRESS CONFERENCE** On Saturday, October 6, 2001, Secretary O'Neill will join G7 Finance Ministers for a Joint G7 Press Conference.

The press conference will begin at approximately 6:00 PM at the Ronald Reagan Building and International Trade Center at 1300 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW; media should use the 14th Street entrance at the center of the building.

Please allow sufficient time to pass through security.

**NOTE: This press conference will be open to members of the media who have successfully applied for and received G7 press credentials. Credentials may be picked up in advance on Thursday, October 4th and Friday, October 5th at the Metropolitan Square Building, 6 th Floor, located on the corner of F and 15th Streets, NW. Credentials may also be picked up on Saturday, October 6th between 3:30-6:00PM at the Ronald Reagan Building, 14th Street entrance. No additional applications for G7 Press Credentials will be accepted.**
