---
title: MARK A. WEINBERGER CONFIRMED ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY FOR TAX POLICY
date: 2001-03-08
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po81
---
*(Archived Content)*

Mark A. Weinberger was sworn in today to be the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Tax Policy). He was confirmed by the United States Senate March 1. Mr. Weinberger has extensive public and private sector experience in tax and Federal budget issues.



Weinberger most recently served as the Director of Ernst & Young LLP's U.S. National Tax Practice where he was responsible for overseeing the development of technical, legislative and regulatory guidance for the firm's tax practice. Prior to that, Mr. Weinberger co-founded a law firm based in Washington, D.C. called Washington Counsel, P.C. which merged into Ernst & Young in May 2000.



Weinberger previously served as Chief of Staff and Counsel to the President's 1994 Bipartisan Commission on Entitlement and Tax Reform. He also served as a senior advisor to the Kemp Commission and as a Commissioner on the National Commission on Retirement Policy.



Mr. Weinberger was appointed by President Clinton - and confirmed by the Senate - last year to serve on the Social Security Advisory Board. The Board advises the President, Congress and the Social Security Commissioner on all aspects of the program.



As Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy, Weinberger has supervisory responsibility for providing the Secretary of the Treasury with policy analysis, advice and recommendations relating to all aspects of domestic and international issues of Federal taxation, including all legislative proposals, regulatory guidance, and tax treaties. The Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy is also responsible for providing the official estimates of all Government receipts for the President's budget, fiscal policy decisions, and Treasury cash management decisions.



A graduate of Emory University, Weinberger holds a Master's degree in Business Administration and a law degree from Case Western Reserve University, as well as an LL.M in Taxation from Georgetown University Law Center.



Mr. Weinberger lives in Gaithersburg, Maryland with his wife Nancy and children Rachel, Noah, Sean and Benjamin.
