---
title: Statement of Rosario Marin, Nominee for United States Treasurer, Before the Committee on Finance, United States Senate
date: 2001-07-31
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po522
---
*(Archived Content)*

Thank you. Chairman Baucus, Ranking Member Grassley, and Members of the Committee on Finance, I am honored to appear before you today.



President Bush has bestowed upon me a great honor by nominating me to serve as Treasurer of the United States. If confirmed, I look forward to working closely with this Committee, the Senate, and with members of the House of Representatives on issues related to the Office of the Treasurer.



I would like to express my great appreciation for this fine nation, where one of its immigrants can be considered for such a distinguished post as United States Treasurer.



Before proceeding any further, I would like to take this opportunity to thank my family. God blessed me with a wonderful set of parents, Mariano and Carmen Spindola, whose work ethic and faith have been the foundation of my life. My brothers Fernando, Mariano and Daniel, and my sisters Margarita and Nancy all of whom have always been supportive. The love of my life Alex, a husband second to none who is with me here today; and three beautiful children Eric, Carmen and Alex, who by the wisdom of God, have filled my life with joy and inspiration.



I ask the committee to indulge me in a very personal and very emotional effort to try to express my deep personal gratitude to this remarkably generous country.



When I came from Mexico at age 14, I did not speak English. I was frightened. After finishing high school, I had to work to help my family. I went to college at night and seven years later; I graduated from California State University in Los Angeles. I worked for two banking institutions for a total of seven years. I was going to be named Assistant Vice President for City National Bank, when, suddenly my life changed. I gave birth to my son Eric, now a handsome young man with Down Syndrome. Accepting that my financial career was on hold at that time, I dedicated my life to my new found treasure, people with disabilities and their families.



If confirmed, I look forward to returning to issues relating to our nation's money and, more specifically, having oversight of its production and safekeeping.



Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I am deeply honored to be considered for the privilege to serve our country in this capacity. I would like to thank President Bush and Secretary O'Neill for the confidence they have shown in me, and I will work to earn your confidence. I am of the belief that Of him to whom much is given, much is expected. America has given me so much. I promise to work diligently with this committee on all matters that you may wish to raise with the Office of the Treasurer. I hope that this will be the beginning of a fine working relationship.



Thank you for your time, I would be pleased to answer any questions.
