---
title: ROSARIO MARIN SWORN IN AS 41st U.S. TREASURER
date: 2001-08-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po558
---
*(Archived Content)*

WASHINGTON, DC - Rosario Marin was sworn in today as the 41stU.S. Treasurer by Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill. She was confirmed by the Senate on Aug. 3, 2001.



As Treasurer, the oldest office in the U.S. government, Marin oversees matters relating to coinage, currency and the production of other instruments issued by the United States. She reviews currency issues and redemptions, as well as signs U.S. currency. She also oversees the U.S. Mint and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing and serves as the National Honorary Director of the Savings Bonds Program.



I am pleased to welcome Rosario Marin to this historic role at the Treasury Department, said Secretary O'Neill. With her long and distinguished record of public service, she will be a valuable asset to the Department and the Bush Administration.



Prior to joining the Administration, Marin served as mayor and councilwoman of Huntington Park, CA. She concurrently worked for AT&T as Public Relations Manager for the Hispanic Market in the Southern California Region.



Marin previously served as Deputy Director of the Governor's Office of Community Relations, in Los Angeles, CA, in the administration of former California Governor Pete Wilson. She also previously served as Assistant Deputy Director of the California State Department of Social Services; as Chair of the California State Council on Developmental Disabilities; and as Chief of Legislative Affairs for the California Department of Developmental Services.



Marin is a graduate of California State University in Los Angeles, and of Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government Programs for Senior Executives in State and Local Government.



Marin and her husband Alex have three children, Eric, Carmen and Alex.
