---
title: THE PRESIDENT'S TAX RELIEF PROPOSALS CUT TAXES FOR 98 MILLION UNITED STATES TAXPAYERS
date: 2001-04-09
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po188
---
*(Archived Content)*

[Attached is State by State Release](http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/docs/TBRequest.pdf) This week, as millions of taxpayers will be scrambling to file their tax returns, its worth pointing out that Washington is taking more from people than it needs to run the government and pay down the debt. The President is proposing structural tax code changes to relieve this over-taxation and allow people to keep more of their own money. He's proposed:**CUTTING INCOME TAX RATES **

**DOUBLING THE CHILD TAX CREDIT There are approximately 26 million taxpayers in United States who took the child credit last year, who are potential beneficiaries of doubling the credit under the President's proposal. ****REDUCING THE MARRIAGE PENALTY There are approximately 50 million married couples in United States who filed jointly last year. Many of those couples paid a marriage penalty and will get marriage penalty relief from the President's income tax cut. **  **ALLOWING NON-ITEMIZERS TO DEDUCT CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS **
- The**87 million**filers in United States who did not claim itemized deductions last year would now be eligible to take a deduction for their charitable contributions.


It's important to enact the President's tax relief plan quickly to give the slowing economy a much needed second wind, said Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill. We're working to put money back in the hands of the people who earned it this year.



DATA SOURCE:*The data were compiled by the Internal Revenue Service based on income tax returns filed in the year 2000 for tax year 1999.*
