---
title: Jeffrey H. Paravano Joins Office of Tax Policy at the Treasury Department
date: 2001-04-02
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po128
---

*(Archived Content)*

Today, Jeffrey H. Paravano joined the Office of Tax Policy as Senior Advisor to Mark Weinberger, Assistant Secretary (Tax Policy). In that position, Paravano is responsible for providing advice on a variety of tax policy issues of interest to the Secretary and Assistant Secretary, including technical and legal advice on legislation to amend, revise, and reform the Internal Revenue Code.



We are extremely pleased to have Jeff on board. He brings a wealth of experience and expertise in a wide variety of tax issues, Weinberger stated.



Prior to joining Treasury, Paravano was a Tax Partner at Baker & Hostetler LLP. He has a broad tax background covering corporate, partnership and venture capital transactions, tax controversy, taxation of banks and real estate investment trusts, and domestic and cross-border tax planning. For six years, he has been an adjunct professor of law in the LL.M. tax program at Case Western Reserve University Law Center, teaching classes in corporate taxation, taxation of property transactions, and tax procedure and research methods. He was Vice-Chair to the American Bar Association Tax Section's Affiliated and Related Committee, a member of the Editorial Advisory Boards of Corporate Business Taxation Monthly and The Tax Adviser, and Chair of the Cleveland International Tax Forum. He was written and lectured extensively on tax topics and is co-author of the Tax Management Portfolio on Corporate Tax Shelters, T.M. 798, to be released in 2001.



Paravano has an undergraduate degree in accounting, cum laude, from John Carroll University. He received his law degree, magna cum laude, from Georgetown where he was Editor-in-Chief of The Tax Lawyer, and holds an LL. M. in taxation, with distinction, also from Georgetown. Paravano is admitted to practice in New York, Connecticut, Ohio, Colorado, Maryland, and Washington, D.C.
