---
title: BARBARA ANGUS JOINS THE OFFICE OF TAX POLICY AT THE TREASURY DEPARTMENT
date: 2001-04-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po204
---
*(Archived Content)*

On April 9, Barbara M. Angus joined the Office of Tax Policy as the Acting International Tax Counsel. In this position, Ms. Angus serves as principal legal advisor with respect to all aspects of international tax policy matters, including the development of legislation, the promulgation of administrative guidance, and the negotiation of tax treaties, and represents the United States before international tax fora.

The breadth of Barbara's experience and her proven track record in international tax law make her an ideal fit, said Mark Weinberger, Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy. We are fortunate to have an individual of Barbara's caliber take the lead in the international tax arena.

Before coming to Treasury, Ms. Angus was a partner in the Federal Tax Policy Group of PricewaterhouseCoopers Washington National Tax Services office, where she represented clients on international tax planning and tax legislative matters. Prior to joining the firm, Ms. Angus was Business Tax Counsel for the Congressional Joint Committee on Taxation. As a senior staff member of the Joint Committee, Ms. Angus had primary responsibility for all international tax matters, including the international provisions contained in the 1996 and 1997 tax legislation. Ms. Angus also coordinated the Joint Committee's responsibilities with respect to the review and analysis of income tax treaties considered by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. She was previously a partner with Kirkland & Ellis in Chicago.

Ms. Angus received an A.B., magna cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa, from Dartmouth College, a J.D., cum laude, from Harvard Law School, and an M.B.A., with high honors, from the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business. Ms. Angus has taught tax courses as a member of the adjunct faculty in the L.L.M. programs at Chicago-Kent College of Law and DePaul University College of Law.
