---
title: President Bush Nominates Rosario Marin to Serve as United States Treasurer
date: 2001-06-28
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po452
---
*(Archived Content)*

President Bush has formally nominated Rosario Marin to be the next Treasurer of the United States in the Department of the Treasury.

A current Councilwoman and a former Mayor of the City of Huntington Park, Rosario Marin was first elected to the city council in 1994. In March of 1999, Ms. Marin was overwhelmingly re-elected to the city with a population of 85,000 of which 99% are Latinos. In addition, Ms. Marin concurrently works for AT&T as Public Relations Manager for the Hispanic Market in the Southern California Region.

Previously, she was with the Office of Governor Pete Wilson in Los Angeles, California as the Deputy Director of the Governor's Office of Community Relations and prior to that served as the Assistant Deputy Director of California State Department of Social Services. In addition, Ms. Marin also served as the Chair of the State Council on Developmental Disabilities and previously was the Chief of Legislative Affairs for the Department of Developmental Services.

If confirmed, Rosario Marin would become the 41stTreasurer of the United States - an office older than the Treasury Department itself. She would have responsibility for oversight of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the United States Mint, and the Savings Bond Marketing Office within the Bureau of the Public Debt.

A graduate of California State University in Los Angeles, she also graduated from Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government Program for Senior Executives in State and Local Government.

A recipient of numerous awards, she is only the second recipient of the distinguished Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy Prize on June 1995 at the United Nations. Most recently, Ms. Marin was honored by being the only public elected official to receive the Excellence in Public Service Award at the 2000 Latino Perspectives Conference in Sacramento. In addition, she was one of two elected officials to be featured on the 20 Up and Coming Latinas in the*Los Angeles Business Journal*, February 2000 issue.

Ms. Marin has been appointed to numerous commissions and boards. They include: California Film Commissioner; Member of Special Olympics International Board of Directors; Former Vice President and current member of Latino Caucus of the League of CA Cities; President of Mayors and Councils Department of the League of California Cities; Member of Public Safety Policy Committee of the League of California Cities; Board Member of Minority Organ Tissue Transplant Education Project; Membership Committee Member of the National Association of Latino Elected Officials; Board Member of HOPE (Hispanas Organized for Political Equality); and Former Chair and current member of Southeast Community Development Corporation.

Councilwoman Marin and her husband Alex Marin of 19 years have three children: Eric, 15; Carmen, 11; and Alex, 9.
