---
title: Florida Native Appears Before Senate Finance Committee for Confirmation Hearing
date: 2001-11-15
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po797
---
*(Archived Content)*

Today, the Bush Administration's nominee for the Treasury Department's Assistant Secretary for Enforcement, Kenneth Lawson, appeared before the Senate Finance Committee for his confirmation hearing. If confirmed, Mr. Lawson's portfolio will include overseeing Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control, the implementation of all Treasury-related provisions in the 2001 Patriot Act, and the execution of the Bush Administration's Money Laundering Strategy. Mr. Lawson will also assist the Treasury Under Secretary for Enforcement with oversight of the Treasury law enforcement bureaus.



If confirmed, Mr. Lawson will join the Treasury Department team from the U.S. Attorney's Office in the Middle District of Florida where he has prosecuted white collar, tax, and violent crime cases since 1994. While at the U.S. Attorney's Office, he was awarded the Department of Justice Director's Award for his prosecution ofUnited States v. Henry J. Lyons. Prior to joining the U.S. Attorney's Office, Mr. Lawson was a military prosecutor in the United States Marine Corps where he served as a Special Assistant United States Attorney for the Eastern District of North Carolina. During his tenure with the Marine Corps Mr. Lawson was also the recipient of a Navel Achievement Medal.



Mr. Lawson is a graduate of Florida State University and received his law degree from Florida Sate University College of Law. While in law school Mr. Lawson clerked for the Florida Supreme Court's Racial Bias Commission where he researched issues relating to racial bias in the Florida judicial system. He is a native of Gainesville, Florida and graduated from Gainesville High School in 1982.
