---
title: Treasury to Mail Out 8.1 Million Checks on Friday
date: 2001-07-26
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po508
---
*(Archived Content)*

Tomorrow the Treasury Department will send out 8.1 million advance payment checks to taxpayers for more than $3.4 billion in tax relief. These checks will be sent to taxpayers whose last two digits of their Social Security numbers are 10-19.

**Week Two (July 27) Social Security Numbers 10-19Number of Checks 8.1 millionAmount of Relief $3.4 billion ** Number of Checks 8.1 millionAmount of Relief $3.4 billion ** Week One (July 20) Social Security Numbers 00-09Number of Checks 7.9 millionAmount of Relief $3.3 billion ** Number of Checks 7.9 millionAmount of Relief $3.3 billion

The Treasury Department will announce every week the number of checks that are being mailed out for that week, and the amount of tax relief that is being sent to taxpayers. Checks will be mailed over a ten-week period, according to the last two digits of the taxpayers Social Security number. Notices from the Internal Revenue Service that tells taxpayers the amount of their check and when they should expect it have been mailed. Single taxpayers will get a check up to $300, head of household up to $500 and married couples filing jointly will get up to $600.

Because the Social Security number determines when checks are mailed, taxpayers may receive their checks at different times than their neighbors or other family members. On a joint return, the first number listed will set the mailout time.

** If the last two digits of your Social Security number are:: 00 - 09 10 - 19 20 - 29 30 - 39 40 - 49 50 - 59 60 - 69 70 - 79 80 - 89 90 - 99  You should receive your check the week of:: July 23 July 30 August 6 August 13 August 20 August 27 September 3 September 10 September 17 September 24**
