---
title: ANDREW B. LYON JOINS AS DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY CENTER FOR TAX ANALYSIS
date: 2001-04-30
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po339
---
*(Archived Content)*

Today, Andrew B. Lyon joined as the Deputy Assistant Secretary (Tax Analysis) for the U.S. Department of the Treasury. He will provide economic advice and analysis for the Office of Tax Policy with regard to all aspects of the economics of Federal taxation. The Deputy Assistant Secretary (Tax Analysis) is the reporting authority for the Office of Tax Analysis, which advises and assists Mark Weinberger, Assistant Secretary (Tax Policy), and his deputies in the development, analysis, and implementation of tax policies and programs.

We are thrilled to have Drew leading our Tax Economic Analysis team, said Mark Weinberger, Assistant Secretary (Tax Policy). His expertise in economics and his broad knowledge of taxation make him a perfect fit.

Prior to his appointment as Deputy Assistant Secretary, Drew was an Associate Professor of Economics at the University of Maryland. He also was a senior economist with PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP in the firm's Washington National Tax Services office. He has published numerous articles covering a wide range of tax issues, including the alternative minimum tax, consumption taxation, distributional analysis of tax reform, and social security financing. He previously held positions with the President's Council of Economic Advisers and the Congressional Joint Committee on Taxation.

Drew received an A.B., with distinction and Phi Beta Kappa, from Stanford University and received his Ph.D. in economics from Princeton University. He has been a faculty research fellow at the National Bureau of Economic Research and was a visiting fellow at the Brookings Institution. He is a member of the American Economic Association and the National Tax Association. Drew lives in Maryland with his wife and two children.
