---
title: JOHN M. DUNCAN SWORN IN AS TREASURY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS
date: 2001-03-09
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po83
---

John M. Duncan was sworn in Tuesday night to be the Treasury Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs by Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill. He was confirmed by the United States Senate on February 28. Duncan brings to the position more than 25 years of Capitol Hill experience.



Duncan served as the Chief of Staff and Legislative Director for U.S. Senator William V. Roth, Jr. from 1985 until January 2, 2001. Duncan provided political and managerial guidance on major legislative initiatives that passed under Roth's Chairmanship of the Senate Finance Committee, including welfare reform, tax cuts, pension reform, elimination of the marriage penalty, reducing capital gains taxes, IRS reform, and trade expansion. From 1984 to 1985, he served as the Majority Staff Director for the U.S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs for Chairman Roth.



From 1978 to 1984 he served as the Minority Staff Director for the House Committee on Government Operations for Ranking Republican Member Frank Horton. He began his Capitol Hill career as a Professional Staff Member for the Subcommittee on Intergovernmental Relations and Human Resources of the House Committee on Governmental Operations, where he worked for Ranking Republican Member John W. Wydler.



In the private sector, Duncan worked for CNA Financial Corporation and Continental Casualty Company. He also served in the U.S Army Reserves and the American Peace Corps.



He holds a B.S. in Industrial Administration from the University of Illinois and a Masters Degree from the New School University.



Duncan and his wife Marcia have one son.
