---
title: DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY UNDER SECRETARY FOR ENFORCEMENT NOMINEE JIMMY GURULÉ APPEARS BEFORE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE FOR CONFIRMATION HEARING
date: 2001-05-15
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po379
---
*(Archived Content)*

The White House nominee for the position of Under Secretary (Enforcement), Jimmy Gurulé, will appear before the Senate Finance Committee on Wednesday, May 16th, for his confirmation hearing. Mr. Gurulé has been nominated to serve as Under Secretary to provide oversight, policy guidance and support to the Treasury Law Enforcement components - the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; the U.S. Customs Service; the Executive Office of Asset Forfeiture; the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center; the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network; the Office of Foreign Assets Control; and the U.S. Secret Service.

A member of the Utah Bar since 1980, Mr. Gurulé brings a wealth of law enforcement experience to the Treasury Department. Mr. Gurulé began his career as a trial attorney with the Department of Justice in Washington D.C. He has subsequently held the following positions: Deputy County Attorney in the Salt Lake City Attorney's Office; Assistant U.S. Attorney and Deputy Chief of the Major Narcotics Section of the Los Angeles branch of the U.S. Attorney's Office; and Assistant Attorney General with the Department of Justice's Office of Justice Programs in Washington D.C.

Mr. Gurulé is an internationally known expert in the field of complex criminal litigation and has lectured extensively on this topic. In addition, he has co-authored numerous texts including The Law of Asset Forfeiture and a casebook entitled Criminal and Scientific Evidence: Cases, Materials and Problems. Mr. Gurulé has a special expertise in the area of organized crime and has participated in several conferences and committees committed to studying this problem. He is a member of the Advisory Board of the National Criminal Justice Trial Advocacy Competition and a member of the LEXIS-NEXIS Advisory Board for Criminal Justice Publications.

Mr. Gurulé joined the Notre Dame Law School faculty in 1989 and in 1996 became a full professor. He also served as Associate Dean for Academic Affairs during the 1998-1999 school year. Jimmy Gurulé earned his B.A. from the University of Utah in 1974 and his J.D. from the University of Utah College of Law in 1980.

Mr. Gurulé was recognized for his contribution to law enforcement when he received the Attorney General's Distinguished Service Award and the Drug Enforcement Administration's highest award, the Administrator's Award. He was honored in 1991 with the prestigious Edmund J. Randolph Award and also received the Award for Excellence in Management in 1992. In addition, Mr. Gurulé is a prominent member of the Hispanic Legal Community. He was honored in 1997 as one of twelve Hispanics nationwide named Pillars of a Just Society. He serves as a faculty advisor to the Hispanic Law Students Association and is a member of the Editorial Advisory Board of the Harvard Journal of Hispanic Policy.
