---
title: 'FARMERS REAP BENEFITS FROM THE PRESIDENT''S TAX RELIEF PLAN'
date: 2001-04-24
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po218
---
*(Archived Content)*

Today the Treasury released new data showing how the President's $1.6 trillion tax cut over ten years would yield a bumper crop of tax relief for America's farms-those taxpayers reporting either farm income or loss.

**DIRECT BENEFITS TO FARMERS AND THEIR FAMILIES When fully phased in (in 2006), 1.8 million farmers and their families would benefit from President Bush's tax cut package. Farmers and their families would receive $33.5 billion in tax relief from the President's rate cuts over ten years. Farmers and their families also would receive additional tax relief from repeal of the Death tax over ten years. President Bush's death tax elimination proposal would deliver $272 billion in tax relief over the next ten years. Individuals with farm assets or liabilities account for 16.3 percent of all death tax liability. Farm families also would benefit from the President's new FFARRM savings accounts. These FFARRM accounts would help families handle the fluctuations of earnings that are a fact of farm life. Farm families would be able to deposit tax-free up to 20 percent of their farm incomes annually. Then within five years they could withdraw the money as taxable income and use it to meet the needs of their families or their farms. FFARRM accounts would provide an additional $1 billion in tax relief over ten years.****FURTHER BENEFITS TO FARMERS AND THEIR FAMILIES Tax relief will mean that farm families have more to invest in their farms, thus earning greater returns from their work and investment. Death tax repeal will mean farm families will save every year by not having to pay for estate planning and life insurance premiums to protect the family farm. Of course, farmers, like other American income taxpayers, stand to benefit from the other elements of President Bush's tax relief proposal - such as marriage penalty relief, education savings incentives, and others.***Data Source: Office of Tax Analysis*
