---
title: JIMMY GURULÉ SWORN IN AS TREASURY UNDER SECRETARY FOR ENFORCEMENT
date: 2001-08-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po539
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill swore Jimmy Gurulé in this afternoon as Treasury Under Secretary for Enforcement. The U.S. Senate voted unanimously to confirm Mr. Gurulé on Friday, August 3rd.

As Under Secretary for Enforcement, Mr. Gurulé will provide oversight, policy guidance and support to the Treasury law enforcement components - the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; the U.S. Customs Service; the Executive Office of Asset Forfeiture; the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center; the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network; the Office of Foreign Assets Control; and the U.S. Secret Service.

A member of the Utah Bar since 1980, Mr. Gurulé brings a wealth of law enforcement experience to the Treasury Department. Mr. Gurulé began his career as a trial attorney with the Department of Justice in Washington D.C. He has subsequently held the following positions: Deputy County Attorney in the Salt Lake City Attorney's Office; Assistant U.S. Attorney and Deputy Chief of the Major Narcotics Section of the Los Angeles branch of the U.S. Attorney's Office; and Assistant Attorney General with the Department of Justice's Office of Justice Programs in Washington D.C. Prior to joining the Treasury Department, Mr. Gurulé taught criminal law and complex criminal litigation at Notre Dame Law School.

Mr. Gurulé was recognized for his contribution to law enforcement when he received the Attorney General's Distinguished Service Award and the Drug Enforcement Administration's highest award, the Administrator's Award. The Department of Justice honored him in 1991 with the prestigious Edmund J. Randolph Award, and again in 1992 with the Award for Excellence in Management. In addition, Mr. Gurulé is a prominent member of the Hispanic Legal Community.

Mr. Gurulé graduated from the University of Utah in 1974 and received his law degree from the University of Utah College of Law in 1980. He and his wife Julia have three children.
