---
title: HENRIETTA HOLSMAN FORE SWORN IN AS DIRECTOR OF U.S. MINT
date: 2001-08-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po542
---
*(Archived Content)*

August 7, 2001--Henrietta Holsman Fore was sworn in today as 37thDirector of the U.S. Mint by Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill. The U.S. Senate confirmed her on Aug. 3.

As Director of the Mint, Fore will oversee an agency that is the world's largest manufacturer of coins, medals and coin-based consumer products. Since Congress created it in 1792, the Mint has grown to a Fortune-500 sized manufacturing and marketing enterprise with 2,800 employees and operations in six states and the District of Columbia. The Mint generated $3.7 billion in revenues in FY 2000 and contributed $2.6 billion in profits to the Treasury.

The agency also produced a record 28 billion coins in 2000, fulfilling the Mint's mission to produce the nation's circulating coinage for trade and commerce. Today, the Mint also ranks among the most technologically advanced enterprises in the country and one of the nation's top e-tailers, with 2000 e-tail revenues totaling $110 million.

The Mint has a proud history that dates back to the earliest days of our country when Jefferson, Washington and Hamilton made the then-revolutionary recommendation -- one currency for one nation, Fore said. Today, the Mint is a highly successful and profitable enterprise that produces the currency Americans need to conduct the business of everyday life while telling the story of our nation.

Previously, Fore was Chairman and CEO of Holsman International, an investment and management company, and Chairman and President of Stockton Products, a manufacturer and distributor of steel products, cement additives, and wire building materials for the U.S. and European construction industry.

Fore most recently served on the Corporate Board of the New York Stock Exchange-listed Dexter Corporation, Windsor Locks, CT, and HSB Group Inc., Hartford, CT.

In addition to her private sector experience, Fore held presidential appointments within the U.S. Agency for International Development as Assistant Administrator for Asia (1991 - 1993) and Assistant Administrator for Private Enterprise (1990 - 1991).

She founded and served, from 1991 to 1993, as the first Chairman of the U.S. - Asia Environmental Partnership, a coalition of business, government and community organizations in the United States and 31 Asian nations.

Fore was a Trustee and Executive Committee member at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). She has specialized in international business and privatization; Asian trade and economic policy; technology cooperation; international finance; environmental policy reform; U.S. bilateral and multilateral development assistance, and women's leadership.

Fore served on the Executive Committee of the Aspen Institute Board of Trustees. She recently was Chairman of the Audit Committee. For several years, she moderated values-based Leadership Seminars and mentored Henry Crown Fellows at the Aspen Institute.

In addition, Fore served as a Trustee and Director of National Public Radio Foundation, Washington, DC, Asia Society, New York, NY, The Asia Foundation, San Francisco, CA, Institute of the Americas, La Jolla, CA, US Committee - Pacific Economic Cooperation Council (USPECC), Washington, DC, and National Foundation for Women Business Owners in Washington, DC.

In 1997, Fore received the*Women Redefining Leadership*award at the State of the World Forum in San Francisco, CA. She has been a member of Chief Executives Organization (CEO), World Presidents' Organization (WPO), The Committee of 200, the Wellesley Business Leadership Council, International Women's Forum, and the National Association of Corporate Directors (NACD).

Fore earned a bachelor's degree in history from Wellesley College and a master's degree in Public Administration from the University of Northern Colorado. She studied International Politics at Oxford University and studied at Stanford University Graduate School of Business. She is married and resides in Washington, DC, and Nevada.

To find out more about the Mint or Fore, log on to the Mint's website[http://www.usmint.gov](http://www.usmint.gov/)
