---
title: STATEMENT OF JOHN B. TAYLOR UNDER SECRETARY, INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND FINANCE COMMITTEE ON BANKING, HOUSING, AND URBAN AFFAIRS UNITED STATES SENATE
date: 2001-06-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po431
---
*(Archived Content)*

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee:

Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the reauthorization of the Export-Import Bank (ExIm) of the United States. Treasury has an important role in the formulation and implementation of policy related to ExIm and I look forward to working with ExIm's new chairman, John Robson, in this regard. Treasury works closely with ExIm to ensure that international financing rules are developed to limit the scope for foreign export financing subsidies. Treasury also works with ExIm to ensure that its programs and policies are consistent with the United States government's broader international economic and financial policies. Treasury chairs the interagency National Advisory Council (NAC) that reviews U.S. international economic policies and also individual ExIm transactions.

The Administration supports a clean reauthorization bill without amendment. It is important for the Administration to have time to assess the institution and draw its own conclusions about how well ExIm works in supporting U.S. exports, and what, if any, adjustments to its charter may be necessary. The request is for a four-year reauthorization; if, in the course of our analysis, we conclude that changes in its charter are necessary, we are prepared to seek additional legislation at that time.

The purpose of ExIm is to aid in the financing and promotion of U.S. exports, which are a vital component of the U.S. economy. ExIm accomplishes this objective in several ways: it assumes commercial and political risks that exporters or private institutions are unwilling to take; it assists U.S. exporters to compete on a level playing field when faced with government-subsidized foreign export credit competition; and it provides leadership and guidance in export financing, especially for small and medium-sized U.S. exporters.

The 2002 budget proposes a 25 percent decrease in program budget resources, in part to reflect lower estimates of international lending risk. This means that ExIm will be able to support more exports per budget dollar than in the past. The administration believes that ExIm can continue to support exporters facing subsidized competition through policy changes that further target assistance on exporters who cannot obtain private sector financing when competing with foreign subsidies. It is important that ExIm's programs foster greater levels of un-subsidized competition in the international market for exported goods, where U.S. companies will be able to compete freely and most successfully.

Exports have been one of the key engines of economic growth in the United States over the last two decades as globalization has accelerated. Our export growth in recent years has outstripped domestic growth, and exports have risen as a share of GDP. The U.S. jobs that exports generate are, on average, higher skill and higher wage jobs than in the economy at large. These trends will continue in the future so exports and ExIm will remain a high priority for the Administration.

ExIm advances the Administration's pro-export agenda in two very specific ways. First, it ensures that the official export credit agencies (ECAs) that other governments have in place do not provide foreign exporters a competitive advantage in international export competitions Second, because ExIm exists, the United States has a seat at the international table that sets rules for how official export financing operates. These rules are made in the OECD by the countries that are the Participants to the Arrangement on Guidelines for Officially Supported Export Credits (Arrangement). This is an arrangement among nations that provide the vast bulk of official export financing for capital goods to developing countries. These rules, which are embodied in the OECD Arrangement, are critical to ensuring that the export financing provided by governments promotes market principles and fair competition.

U.S. Export Financing Philosophy and the Role of the OECD Arrangement

Reducing export financing subsidies is critically important from an international policy perspective because they distort trade in favor of firms in those countries offering subsidies. By distorting trade flows, they also distort the global allocation of resources and reduce international economic efficiency. Moreover, subsidized exports disadvantage U.S. exporters because other governments budget proportionately more resources for export subsidies than does the United States.

Limiting these subsidies is also extremely important from a budget point of view. Simply put, these subsidies drain the budget.

The OECD Arrangement embodies agreed rules that provide international financing disciplines. The Arrangement plays an important role in the overall U.S. strategy to promote free trade by reducing export subsidies in the international arena. It complements the WTO anti-subsidy rules - specifically, by reducing export-financing subsidies. The United States has used the Arrangement to build an international rule-based system of limits on export subsidies.

The WTO does not restrict the use of aid-financed subsidies because resource transfers to LDCs are important for their development. The United States uses the OECD Arrangement to ensure aid-financed subsidies are really development aid and not export promotion in disguise.

Treasury leads the U.S. delegation to negotiations of the OECD Arrangement. Finance Ministries normally lead this OECD policy-making body. ExIm's representative sits next to Treasury in virtually all OECD negotiations.

Let me provide two examples of how the OECD Arrangement limits subsidies:

Limits on Interest Rate Subsidies

Under an agreement negotiated in the 1980s, the Arrangement ensures that interest rates offered by ECAs are full 100 basis points above the cost of funds to governments. This means that exporters compete on the basis of the quality and pricing of their goods and services, and not on the basis of the most favorable officially supported financing terms. It also reduces the likelihood that commercial banks are systematically undercut by subsidized financing. Annual appropriations that ExIm now requires for any given level of exports are hundreds of millions of dollars lower than they would be without these disciplines on interest rate subsidies.

Reductions in Tied Aid

The OECD Arrangement also limits the use of tied aid. Tied aid is subsidized financing that is offered in the name of economic development but is tied, or linked, to procurement from a firm in the donor country. For instance, tied aid is offered by the Japan Bank for International Cooperation. Tied aid can arbitrarily close markets to efficient exporters, and misallocate global resources.

The benefits of negotiating and enforcing international restrictions on the use of tied aid are clear. In 1991, before the OECD tied aid rules, traditional tied aid donors reported almost

$9 billion of tied aid. In 2000, these same donors reported only $1.8 billion of tied aid -- an 80% reduction. (These tied aid figures overstate the actual volume of tied aid flows. These tied aid figures are based on OECD notifications ofintendedoffers of tied aid. A significant number of these credits have been deemed ineligible for tied aid under the OECD Arrangement and abandoned.)

When one adds in the tied aid now offered by Japan, the figure for overall tied aid is approximately $5.5 billion. However, the Japanese component of this figure appears to represent a shift from one type of potentially trade distorting aid - untied aid - to another -- tied aid.

From a policy perspective, this shift in Japanese aid has not increased the overall amount of potential trade distortions but rather shifted it from one official category to another. Therefore, this shift does not offset the large reductions in trade distortions achieved in the programs of the traditional tied aid donors.

Tied aid is now focused on the poorer LDCs, those with per capita incomes below $3,000 annually. Wealthier countries like Mexico, Korea and Malaysia are no longer eligible for tied aid. Tied aid is now virtually non-existent in projects for manufacturing, power (thermal and hydro), oil and gas pipelines, telecommunications, and sophisticated air traffic control equipment. This has opened up these sectors to U.S. exporters to compete for commercial contracts. Treasury has previously estimated that as the result of reducing tied aid trade distortions, U.S. exports are higher by $1 billion a year than they would have been without the Arrangement disciplines.

To better appreciate the impact of this policy success, if the U.S. had been required to compete for these additional exports using tied aid instead of having negotiated OECD restrictions for tied aid, ExIm would have required about $300 million annually in additional appropriations - a cumulative total of $2.4 billion of additional appropriations since 1993, the first full year of implementation of the tied aid rules.

The OECD tied aid rules have been tremendously successful in significantly narrowing the scope for tied aid - thereby reducing trade distortions, leveling the playing field for U.S. exporters, reducing budget pressures, and promoting a much more appropriate use of aid resources.

Treasury continues to work very closely with ExIm on tied aid issues. This work includes negotiating Arrangement agreements, implementing and policing these agreements, and ensuring that tied aid that meets the OECD rules is not being used to undermine the long-term competitiveness of U.S. exporters for commercial sales. In carrying out our tied aid work we also work closely with ExIm in use of the Tied Aid Capital Projects Fund (War Chest).

Future Plans

With tied aid significantly disciplined, Treasury is now focusing on two new forms of trade distortions that arise in export financing: untied aid and market windows.

1)Untied Aid

These distortions can occur even if aid is not legally tied to donor country firms - the case of so -called "untied aid." Currently, untied aid is exempt from the tied aid rules solely because the donor government does notdirectlytie procurement to its firms. With untied aid, procurement is effectively tied to firms from the donor country in a variety of less direct ways.

The requirement that the aid recipient use the design and engineering work for a project provided by firms in the donor country biases the choice of technologies in favor of donor firms. Similarly, the requirement by the donor that one if its firms run the bidding process, including qualifying bidders, evaluating bids, and awarding bids, can create bias in favor of firms from the donor country. Finally, the aid relationship itself encourages the recipient to reward the donor by selecting its firms in an effort to ensure the continued flow of this aid financing in the future.

Nevertheless, in spite of these biases, untied aid remains free to finance projects that tied aid cannot - including commercially viable projects, and projects in countries with per capita income above $3,000.

There are no OECD rules on what procedures, practices and procurement results constitute untied aid - de facto - for purposes of being exempt from the tied aid disciplines intended to open markets and reduce trade distortions. U.S. exporters are concerned that untied aid programs are not always freely available to finance exports from other countries calling into question whether untied aid should continue to be exempt from Arrangement rules that govern the proper use of aid.

Without Arrangement disciplines, untied aid can be used to circumvent the tied aid rules and distort trade and misallocate global resources. Perhaps more importantly, without disciplines on untied aid, existing tied aid donors could "untie" their aid programs and escape the existing tied aid disciplines. This would put the U.S. back in the situation we faced in the early 1980s when aid was used to systematically distort trade. In fact, there is a strong financial incentive for tied aid donors to "untie" aid because the minimum concessionality - the budget sacrifice -- required for untied aid is approximately half that required for tied aid - about 17% vs. 35% of the credit's value. Therefore, untied aid requires no more budget sacrifice now than tied aid did prior to Reagan-era OECD negotiations that increased these concessionality requirements.

Recognizing the many indirect biases in procurement decisions that can arise with untied aid financing, Treasury formally proposed in the OECD to extend the highly successful tied aid disciplines tountied aid. This would ensure that tied aid and untied aid are available for the same types of projects in the same countries. Treasury is now working to build support within the OECD for this proposal.

2)Market windows

Market windows are another threat to the longer-term integrity of existing OECD disciplines. Market windows are quasi-official institutions that support national exports. The two largest are KfW of Germany and EDC of Canada. Because Market window institutions purport to operate as private sector actors, there is currently no agreement in the OECD to discipline them or to provide transparency concerning the terms and conditions of this financing. Treasury plans to begin a major push in the OECD on Market window transparency this Fall. We also will work with ExIm and OMB to undertake our own analysis of Market windows. We will then work to design and negotiate appropriate Arrangement disciplines for these institutions.

Conclusion

In summary, in this testimony, I have tried to review the role of Treasury in working through the OECD and with ExIm to reduce the amount of trade distorting subsidies in the world. We at Treasury look forward to working closely with Chairman Robson - a former Deputy Treasury Secretary - to look for and reduce new forms of export financing subsidies and trade distortions.
