---
title: STATEMENT OF KENNETH LAWSON NOMINEE FOR ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY FOR ENFORCEMENT BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE UNITED STATES SENATE
date: 2001-11-15
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po789
---
*(Archived Content)*

Thank you Chairman Baucus, Senator Grassley, and Members of the Committee. It is an honor and privilege to be here today to testify in support of my nomination to serve as the next Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Enforcement.



I would like to thank President Bush for the opportunity to serve my country. I further would like to thank Secretary Paul O'Neill for his support and confidence. I am humbled and honored about the possibility of serving the Nation at this unique time in history.



Before proceeding any further, I would like to take the opportunity to thank my family for their love and support. Although they could not be here today, their love and guidance are always with me. Further, for the past ten years, I have been blessed with a loving and supportive wife. Please allow me to introduce my wife, partner, and best friend, Sonia Lawson. I am a richer man because of her.



I look forward to the challenges, opportunities, and responsibilities that await me if confirmed as the next Assistant Secretary for Enforcement. I believe that I am qualified to hold this important Treasury post. For the last decade, I have been privileged to serve our country as both a Marine officer and a federal prosecutor. Ten years ago, I began my government service as a United States Marine prosecutor. During my military service, I was appointed as a Special Assistant United States Attorney in the Eastern District of North Carolina. As a SAUSA, I traveled the Eastern District prosecuting cases in federal court on behalf of the United States. At this time, I must recognize Major Brian Jackson, United States Marine Corps, my fellow Marine who had served with me then. He is here in the audience to support me today.



After my military service, I was privileged to serve as an Assistant United States Attorney in the Middle District of Florida. As an AUSA, I worked closely with each of Enforcement's bureaus: the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Customs Service, Secret Service, and IRS-CI. Together, we worked closely in investigating and prosecuting financial crimes that ravaged the Middle District of Florida. From my seven years as an Assistant, I have learned that dedicated professionals are housed in Enforcement's bureaus. Although each bureau's mission is as separate as fingers on a hand, when brought together as like a fist, Enforcement's bureaus are a dynamic force in the war against crime.



However, the tragic events of September 11thhave galvanized our Enforcement bureaus to focus their skills and talents to identify, disrupt and dismantle the terrorists' financial networks that have funded our enemies. If confirmed to serve as the Assistant Secretary of Enforcement, I pledge to use all my energy and skills to lead this mission, and to work hand in hand with our bureaus. With all respect, I am here before you today because this is my war and I want to be part of the battle.



Thank you Mr. Chairman. It would be my honor to answer any questions.
