---
title: "Statement of Jimmy Gurulé, Nominee for Under Secretary of the Treasury for Enforcement, Before the Committee on Finance, United States Senate"
date: 2001-05-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po381
---

Thank you Chairman Grassley, Senator Baucus, and members of the Committee. It is an honor and privilege to be here today to testify in support of my nomination to serve as the next Under Secretary of the Treasury for Enforcement.

I would like to thank President Bush for the opportunity to serve my country and the new Administration. I further would like to thank Secretary Paul O'Neill for his support and confidence. I am excited about the possibility of serving under his strong leadership at the Treasury Department.

Before proceeding any further, I would like to take the opportunity to introduce my family. For the past twenty-one years, I have been blessed with a loving and supportive wife. Please allow me to introduce my wife, partner, and best friend, Julia Cordova-Gurule. I further have been blessed with three wonderful children, two to whom were able to accompany me today - my fourteen-year-old son, Alejandro, and my eleven-year-old daughter, Sophia. Unfortunately, their older brother, Santiago, who just completed his sophomore year of studies at the University of Notre Dame, is working and could not make the trip.

I look forward to the challenges, opportunities, and responsibilities that await me if confirmed as the next Under Secretary for Enforcement. I believe that I am uniquely qualified to hold this important Treasury post.

I have served as a federal and state prosecutor for approximately ten years. At Notre Dame Law School, I currently teach Criminal Law, Criminal Procedure, Complex Criminal Litigation, and International Criminal Law, and have had the opportunity to publish extensively on a broad range of criminal justice issues. Based on the totality of these experiences, I understand the critical issues confronting federal law enforcement officers investigating international drug trafficking, domestic and international money laundering, and complex criminal enterprises.

My management and administrative experience, gained while serving in the former Bush Administration at the Department of Justice as Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Justice Programs, has prepared me to administer the diverse activities of the law enforcement bureaus and offices that comprise the Office of Enforcement.

The Treasury law enforcement bureaus have a long and distinguished history. Each bureau contributes unique expertise to enforcing our nation's laws and protecting its citizens.

If confirmed, I will provide strong leadership to the Office of Enforcement, maintain the public's trust, and work in partnership with Congress to meet the challenges faced by the Treasury Department and its bureaus.

Thank you Mr. Chairman. I would be happy to answer any questions.
