---
title: DEPUTY TREASURY SECRETARY DAM TO ARGUE FSC APPEAL AT WTO
date: 2001-11-05
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po758
---

Today the Treasury Department announced that Deputy Treasury Secretary Kenneth W. Dam will make the opening argument for the United States in the Tax Treatment for 'Foreign Sales Corporations' appeal to the World Trade Organization. Dam will make the opening arguments in Geneva, Switzerland on November 26, 2001.



After Dam presents the opening arguments, the remainder of the appeal will be argued by Kent Jones, Assistant to the U.S. Solicitor General.



The selection of Dam and Jones to argue the appeal is significant. Dam is the second-highest official in the U.S. Treasury Department. He sends an important signal of the seriousness with which the Administration takes the case. The involvement of the Solicitor General's office signals how unified the Administration is in its arguments.



United States Trade Representative Robert B. Zoellick praises Dam as being the perfect choice to argue the appeal for the United States. Before serving as Deputy Secretary of the Treasury, Dam served as Deputy Secretary of State under President Reagan and Executive Director of the Council on Economic Policy in the Nixon Administration. Said Zoellick, Dam has the background in international economics to argue this appeal. In addition, Dam has published books and articles on international trade and taxation including, a book on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and a book on the Federal Tax Treatment of Foreign Income.
