---
title: STATEMENT OF JAMES F. SLOAN ACTING UNDER SECRETARY (ENFORCEMENT) PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE HEARING BEFORE THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT REFORM AND OVERSIGHT DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA SUBCOMMITTEE
date: 2001-03-21
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po100
---
*(Archived Content)*

MADAM CHAIRWOMAN, AND MEMBERS OF THE SUBCOMMITTEE, THANK YOU FOR INVITING ME TO TESTIFY TODAY ABOUT THIS IMPORTANT MATTER. AS THE ACTING UNDER SECRETARY FOR ENFORCEMENT I HAVE OVERSIGHT RESPONSIBILITY FOR TREASURY'S LAW ENFORCEMENT BUREAUS WHICH INCLUDE THE CUSTOMS SERVICE, ATF, THE FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING CENTER, THE FINANCIAL CRIMES ENFORCEMENT NETWORK, AND THE UNITED STATES SECRET SERVICE. I WOULD LIKE TO OFFER SOME GENERAL REMARKS AND THEN INTRODUCE DIRECTOR STAFFORD TO PROVIDE MORE DETAILED ANALYSIS OF THIS ISSUE.



IN 1995, FORMER SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY RUBIN DIRECTED THE SECRET SERVICE TO CLOSE A SEGMENT OF PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE IN FRONT OF THE WHITE HOUSE TO VEHICULAR TRAFFIC. THIS DECISION WAS, IN PART, BASED ON RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE OF THE WHITE HOUSE SECURITY REVIEW, WHICH WAS THE MOST EXTENSIVE REVIEW OF SECURITY OF THE WHITE HOUSE EVER CONDUCTED. OTHER FACTORS INFLUENCING THIS DECISION INCLUDED THE LOSS OF LIFE AND INJURIES SUFFERED IN THE BOMBINGS OF THE U.S. MARINE BARRACKS IN BERUIT, THE WORLD TRADE CENTER IN NEW YORK CITY, AND THE MURRAH FEDERAL BUILDING IN OKLAHOMA CITY. THE CONCLUSION OF THE WHITE HOUSE SECURITY REVIEW WAS CLEAR - THAT CLOSING PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE IN FRONT OF THE WHITE HOUSE WAS THE ONLY ALTERNATIVE AVAILABLE THAT WOULD PROTECT THE WHITE HOUSE FROM THE DEVASTATING IMPACT OF A VEHICLE BOMB DETONATED ON THE AVENUE IN FRONT OF THE COMPLEX.



THE WHITE HOUSE SECURITY REVIEW WAS INITIATED FOLLOWING SEVERAL SECURITY INCIDENTS AT THE WHITE HOUSE, THE MOST NOTABLE BEING THE CRASH OF A SMALL PLANE ON THE SOUTH GROUNDS. IN ADDITION TO REVIEW STAFF, SECRETARY BENTSEN APPOINTED A NONPARTISAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE COMPOSED OF SIX DISTINGUISHED AMERICANS TO ENSURE THAT THE REVIEW'S WORK WAS THOROUGH AND UNBIASED. THESE ADVISORS WERE: ROBERT CARSWELL, FORMER DEPUTY SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY; WILLIAM COLEMAN, FORMER SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION; CHARLES DUNCAN, FORMER SECRETARY OF ENERGY AND DEPUTY SECRETARY OF DEFENSE; GENERAL DAVID JONES, FORMER CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF; DR. JUDITH RODIN, PRESIDENT OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA; AND JUDGE WILLIAM WEBSTER, FORMER DIRECTOR OF THE FBI AND CIA. THE REVIEW EXAMINED SEVERAL SECURITY RELATED INCIDENTS THAT OCCURRED IN THE VICINITY OF THE WHITE HOUSE.



THE REVIEW WAS AN EXTENSIVE, EIGHT MONTH STUDY, INVOLVING INTERVIEWS AND BRIEFINGS OF MORE THAN 300 INDIVIDUALS FROM OVER TEN GOVERNMENT AGENCIES, AND ANALYSIS OF MORE THAN 1,000 DOCUMENTS. EXPERTS FROM EIGHT FOREIGN COUNTRIES WERE ALSO CONSULTED AS WELL AS THREE FORMER PRESIDENTS IN ORDER TO BRING ADDITIONAL PERSPECTIVE TO THE REVIEW. THE REVIEW RESULTED IN THE ISSUANCE OF A CLASSIFIED REPORT OF MORE THAN 500 PAGES, AS WELL AS A SHORTER PUBLIC REPORT. TREASURY'S OUTSIDE PANEL OF DISTINGUISHED EXPERTS CONCURRED WITH ALL OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS, INCLUDING THE CLOSING OF PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE.



BEFORE RECOMMENDING TO CLOSE PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE, THE WHITE HOUSE SECURITY REVIEW EXPLORED A WIDE VARIETY OF OPTIONS IN AN EFFORT TO PROVIDE AN APPROPRIATE LEVEL OF SECURITY AT THE WHITE HOUSE, YET MINIMIZE THE PUBLIC IMPACT. AFTER ITS EXTENSIVE INFORMATION GATHERING WAS COMPLETE, THE REVIEW CONCLUDED THAT THERE IS NO ALTERNATE TO PROHIBITING VEHICULAR TRAFFIC ON PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE THAT WOULD ENSURE THE SAFETY OF THE PRESIDENT AND OTHERS IN THE WHITE HOUSE COMPLEX FROM EXPLOSIVE DEVICES CARRIED BY VEHICLES NEAR ITS BOUNDARIES.



SINCE THAT DECISION, NUMEROUS STUDIES HAVE BEEN UNDERTAKEN AND MANY PROPOSALS OFFERED FOR ALTERNATIVE WAYS TO ENSURE THE SAFETY OF THE PRESIDENT AND REOPEN PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE TO TRAFFIC. THE SECRET SERVICE CONTINUES TO MONITOR ALL PROPOSALS AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES TO DETERMINE WHETHER THERE ARE ANY ALTERNATIVES THAT WOULD ADEQUATELY ENSURE THE SAFETY OF THE WHITE HOUSE COMPLEX. AFTER CAREFUL ANALYSIS, THE SECRET SERVICE HAS CONCLUDED THAT OPENING PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE DIRECTLY IN FRONT OF THE WHITE HOUSE WOULD INCREASE THE THREAT TO THE WHITE HOUSE COMPLEX POSED BY AN EXPLOSIVE-LADEN VEHICLE.



WE DO NOT BELIEVE THE CLOSURE OF PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE HAS AFFECTED THE PUBLIC'S ACCESS TO THE WHITE HOUSE. THE WHITE HOUSE COMPLEX IS STILL VISITED BY THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE EACH DAY, AND THE AREA IN FRONT OF THE WHITE HOUSE HAS REMAINED OPEN TO PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC. THERE ARE SEVERAL DESIGNS THAT HAVE BEEN PROPOSED THAT WOULD MAKE THE SEGMENT OF PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE IN FRONT OF THE WHITE HOUSE A BEAUTIFUL AND INVITING PEDESTRIAN AREA.



OUR JOB IS TO PROTECT THE PRESIDENT, THE WHITE HOUSE, THE PEOPLE WHO WORK IN THE BUILDING, AND THE PEOPLE WHO VISIT IT. THE CLOSING OF PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE IS A REAL PUBLIC SAFETY ISSUE THAT AFFECTS NOT ONLY THE SAFETY OF THE FIRST FAMILY, BUT OF ALL THOSE WHO VISIT AND WORK IN THE AREA AROUND THE WHITE HOUSE. THE OKLAHOMA CITY BOMBING, FOR EXAMPLE, DAMAGED OVER 300 BUILDINGS, INCLUDING TEN STRUCTURES THAT COLLAPSED. ANY DISCUSSION ABOUT REOPENING PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE SHOULD INCLUDE AN OBJECTIVE ASSESSMENT OF RISK.



I AM AWARE THAT THE NATIONAL CAPITAL PLANNING COMMISSION HAS CONVENED A TASK FORCE TO REVIEW THE IMPACT OF SECURITY MEASURES AROUND THE WHITE HOUSE. IT IS MY UNDERSTANDING THAT THIS PANEL IS COMPRISED OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE ADMINISTRATION, CONGRESS, AND THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, WHO WILL WORK WITH THE SECRET SERVICE AND OTHER AGENCIES TO REVIEW SECURITY AND LOOK AT WAYS TO MAKE FEDERAL SECURITY LESS INTRUSIVE. THERE MAY BE OTHER INDEPENDENT STUDIES ONGOING. I CAN ASSURE YOU THAT THE DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY WILL CONTINUE TO MONITOR THIS ISSUE CAREFULLY, AND WE WILL ASSESS NEW DEVELOPMENTS AS THEY OCCUR.



THE DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY REMAINS FULLY COMMITTED TO THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE SECRET SERVICE REGARDING SECURITY MEASURES AT THE WHITE HOUSE. THANK YOU.
