---
title: '"TREASURY, IRS WORK TO PROVIDE RELIEF FOR VICTIMS OF ATTACKS"'
date: 2001-09-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po604
---
*(Archived Content)*

WASHINGTON - Internal Revenue Service Commissioner Charles O. Rossotti today waived failure to deposit penalties for air transportation taxes due to be deposited on September 12, 2001. Those penalties will be waived if deposits are made by Wednesday, September 26, 2001. The IRS will re-evaluate the duration of this relief as circumstances warrant.

This is part of a broader effort by the Treasury Department and the IRS to provide relief for victims of attacks in New York and at the Pentagon. In the aftermath of Tuesday's tragedy, the IRS and Treasury want to assure taxpayers, businesses and tax practitioners that they are working aggressively to issue tax guidance and resolve potential issues.

The IRS and Treasury will be announcing payment and filing relief for individual and business taxpayers affected by these attacks. Details will be issued as soon as possible.

The IRS and Treasury want to assure the victims, families and others affected by the tragedies in New York and at the Pentagon that the agencies will do everything possible to provide administrative tax relief quickly. Just as importantly, the IRS and Treasury will work to minimize the distraction of tax issues during this terrible time.

The entire Treasury family extends its prayers and sympathies to the families, friends, government workers and others affected by this attack.
