---
title: 'WEEK THREE: TREASURY TO MAIL OUT 8.185 MILLION CHECKS ON FRIDAY'
date: 2001-08-02
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po560
---
*(Archived Content)*

Tomorrow the Treasury Department will send out 8.185 million advance payment checks to taxpayers for more than $3.468 billion in tax relief. These checks will be sent to taxpayers whose last two digits of their Social Security numbers are 20-29.

**Week Three (August 3) Social Security Numbers 20-29Number of Checks 8.185 millionAmount of Relief $3.468 billion** Number of Checks 8.185 millionAmount of Relief $3.468 billion** Week Two (July 27) Social Security Numbers 10-19Number of Checks 8.133 millionAmount of Relief $3.443 billion** Number of Checks 8.133 millionAmount of Relief $3.443 billion** Week One (July 20) Social Security Numbers 00-09Number of Checks 7.908 millionAmount of Relief $3.336 billion** Number of Checks 7.908 millionAmount of Relief $3.336 billion** Three Week TotalNumber of Checks 24.226 millionAmount of Relief $10.247 billion** Number of Checks 24.226 millionAmount of Relief $10.247 billion

The Treasury Department will announce every week the number of checks that are being mailed out for that week, and the amount of tax relief that is being sent to taxpayers. Checks will be mailed over a ten-week period, according to the last two digits of the taxpayers Social Security number. Notices from the Internal Revenue Service will inform taxpayers the amount of their check and when they should expect it have been mailed. Single taxpayers will get a check up to $300, head of household up to $500 and married couples filing jointly will get up to $600.

Because the Social Security number determines when checks are mailed, taxpayers may receive their checks at different times than their neighbors or other family members. On a joint return, the first number listed will set the mailout time.

 

**If the last two digits of your Social Security number are You should receive your check the week of**

00 - 09

July 23

10 - 19

July 30

20 - 29

August 6

30 - 39

 

August 13

40 - 49

August 20

50 - 59

August 27

60 - 69

September 3

70 - 79

September 10

80 - 89

September 17

90 - 99

September 24
