---
title: MICHELE DAVIS SWORN IN AS ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC AFFAIRS
date: 2001-08-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po541
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill swore Michele Davis in today as Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs. The U. S. Senate voted by unanimous consent to confirm Davis on August 3, 2001.

As Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs, Davis is the lead representative of the Treasury Department for media, business, professional trade organizations, consumer groups, and the public. The Office of Public Affairs develops and implements communications strategy for the Department and advises officials within the Department and its bureaus how best to communicate issues and priorities of public interest. Davis also oversees the Office of Public Liaison and the Office of Public Education.

Ms. Davis was Communications Director to House Majority Leader Dick Armey (R-TX) from 1997 until January 2001. Davis served as chief spokesman for the Majority Leader's office and as an advisor to the House Republican leadership. Davis began work in the Majority Leader's Office in 1995.

Before joining the Majority Leader's staff, Davis served as an Economist with the Minority Staff of the Joint Economic Committee in Congress and prior to that Davis worked as an Economist with Citizens for a Sound Economy (CSE), a free-market advocacy organization.

Originally from Louisville, Kentucky, Davis has a Master's degree in economics from the American University and earned her Bachelor of Science in Foreign Service from Georgetown University in 1988.
