---
title: 'O''NEILL STATEMENT ON THE IRS OVERSIGHT BOARD INTERIM REPORT ON THE IRS FY 2002 BUDGET'
date: 2001-04-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po196
---
*(Archived Content)*

Like President Bush, I believe strongly the IRS should enforce the tax code fairly and evenly with the least imposition on the taxpayer. Consistent with that goal, I believe the President has requested adequate resources to fund necessary IRS improvements.



In balancing competing priorities in the budget, the President has requested a sensible but significant 7 percent increase in funding for the IRS, which is nearly twice the average government-wide increase.



The budget includes close to $400 million in responsible investments to modernize the IRS' outdated computer systems. This multi-year project will provide the IRS with the modern tools needed both to deliver first class customer service to America's taxpayers and to ensure that compliance programs are administered efficiently. The President's budget also includes follow-on funding for the STABLE initiative to complete the hiring of almost 4,000 staff to address these same issues.



Commissioner Rosotti and the IRS have made progress implementing the 1998 reforms mandated by Congress, and the IRS has laid out a clear plan to improve service and enforcement while protecting taxpayer rights.



I am confident that the amount in the President's budget will allow the IRS to provide America's taxpayers with better quality service and help to enforce the tax law with integrity and fairness. To achieve that goal, I will continue to work with rank-and-file employees of the IRS, members of the IRS Oversight Board, and Members of Congress.
