---
title: FBIIC Outlines Policy for Telecommunications
date: 2002-12-19T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3707
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Financial and Banking Information Infrastructure Committee  (FBIIC), chaired by Treasury Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions Wayne A. Abernathy, today announced its policy and process for sponsoring qualified private sector financial  organizations for the Telecommunications Service Priority (TSP) Program.

The TSP Program, administered by the National Communications System (NCS), was developed to ensure priority treatment for the nation's most important telecommunication services -- those supporting National Security and Emergency Preparedness  (NS/EP) missions.  The TSP Program authorizes and requires service vendors to provide and restore TSP-assigned services before non-TSP services. It also provides vendors with legal protection for giving preferential treatment to NS/EP users over non-NS/EP users.

The FBIIC is a standing committee of the President's Critical Infrastructure Protection Board and also serves as the Office of Homeland Security Financial Markets Work  Group. The FBIIC is charged with coordinating federal and state financial regulatory efforts to improve the reliability and security of the U.S. financial system.

Members of the FBIIC include representatives of the Commodity Futures Trading  Commission,  the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, the Federal Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  the  Federal  Housing  Finance Board, the Federal  Reserve  Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve Board, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners,  the  National  Credit  Union Administration,  the  Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of  Federal  Housing  Enterprise  Oversight,  the  Offices  of Homeland and Cyberspace  Security,  the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the Securities and Exchange Commission.

The FBIIC Telecommunications Service Priority policy is attached. It is also available on the FBIIC website[www.fbiic.gov](http://www.fbiic.gov/).

 

**Related Documents:**

- [TSP Policy](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/po37071.pdf)
