---
title: CATHERINE HUGHES JOINS TREASURY’S OFFICE OF TAX POLICY AS ESTATE AND GIFT TAX ATTORNEY ADVISOR
date: 2002-08-12T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3341
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Acting Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy Pam Olson today announced that Catherine Veihmeyer Hughes has joined the Office of Tax Policy as the Estate and Gift Tax Attorney Advisor.

Cathy has more than 20 years of experience in estate and gift planning, and is the former Chair of the ABA Tax Section Estate & Gift Tax Committee. Treasury is extremely fortunate to have someone of her caliber join the Office of Tax Policy, stated Pam Olson, Acting Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy.

Most recently, Ms. Hughes was a Partner in the McLean, Virginia, office of McGuireWoods LLP, where she managed the firm’s Estate Planning and Administration Practice in Northern Virginia, Maryland, and the District of Columbia. She has broad and extensive experience dealing with sophisticated estate planning, transfer tax issues, estate and trust administration, and related fiduciary and tax matters.

Ms. Hughes is a Fellow of the American College of Trust and Estate Counsel, and (until her acceptance of her position at Treasury) was serving as the Chair of the Estate and Gift Tax Committee of the ABA Section of Taxation. She is a former Chair of the Estates, Trusts and Probate Law Section of the D.C. Bar. Ms. Hughes is admitted to practice in Virginia, Maryland and the District of Columbia.

Ms. Hughes received a B.A. in Mathematics from the University of Dayton and a J.D. from Catholic University of America.
