---
title: HELEN M. HUBBARD JOINS TREASURY AS THE TAX LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL FOR THE OFFICE OF TAX POLICY
date: 2002-09-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3404
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Acting Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy Pam Olson today announced that Helen Hubbard has joined the Office of Tax Policy as Tax Legislative Counsel.



Helen is a rising star in the legal profession, and the Treasury Department is very fortunate to have someone with Helen's extensive experience join the Office of Tax Policy, stated Pam Olson, Treasury Acting Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy.



Most recently, Hubbard served as partner at Ernst & Young LLP in the Accounting Methods and Inventory group in the National Tax Department. In addition to her expertise in accounting issues, Hubbard has extensive experience in corporate and partnership tax issues. Prior to joining Ernst & Young LLP, Hubbard was a partner with Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld, LLP. Hubbard also served as an adjunct Professor of Law at Georgetown University Law Center, teaching courses in income tax accounting.



Hubbard has held a number of positions in the American Bar Association Section of Taxation, including Assistant Secretary of the Council of the Section, Co-Chair of the Code Simplification Task Force, Vice Chair of the Government Relations Committee, and Chair of the Tax Accounting Committee. She is a member of the District of Columbia Bar and the Texas State Bar.



Hubbard received a Bachelor of Business Administration from Texas Tech University and a Juris Doctor from Southern Methodist University, graduating first in her class.
