---
title: U.S. International Reserve Position
date: 2002-08-01
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3312
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the latest week. As indicated in this table, U.S. reserve assets totaled $75,511 million as of the end of that week, compared to $76,538 million as of the end of the prior week.

**I. Official U.S. Reserve Assets***(in US millions)*

**TOTAL**

**July 19, 2002 **

**July 26, 2002**

**76,538**

**75,511**

1. Foreign Currency Reserves1

**Euro**

**Yen**

**TOTAL**

**Euro**

**Yen**

**TOTAL**

a. Securities

6,416

12,209

18,625

6,261

12,569

18,830

*Of which, issuer headquartered in the U.S.*

 

 

0

 

 

0

b. Total deposits with:

*b.i. Other central banks and BIS*

10,692

4,111

14,803

10,410

3,332

13,742

*b.ii. Banks headquartered in the U.S.*

 

 

0

 

 

0

b.ii. Of which, banks located abroad

 

 

0

 

 

0

*b.iii. Banks headquartered outside the U.S.*

 

 

0

 

 

0

b.iii. Of which, banks located in the U.S.

 

 

0

 

 

0

2. IMF Reserve Position2

 

 

20,292

 

 

20,184

3. Special Drawing Rights (SDRs)2

 

 

11,775

 

 

11,712

4. Gold Stock3

 

 

11,044

 

 

11,044

5. Other Reserve Assets

 

 

0

 

 

0

 

**II. Predetermined Short-Term Drains on Foreign Currency Assets**

 

**July 19, 2002 **

**July 26, 2002**

**Euro**

**Yen**

**TOTAL**

**Euro**

**Yen**

**TOTAL**

1. Foreign currency loans and securities

 

 

0

 

 

0

2. Aggregate short and long positions in forwards and futures in foreign currencies vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar:

*2.a. Short positions*

 

 

0

 

 

0

*2.b. Long positions*

 

 

0

 

 

0

3. Other

 

 

0

 

 

0

 

**III. Contingent Short-Term Net Drains on Foreign Currency Assets**

 

**July 19, 2002 **

**July 26, 2002**

**Euro**

**Yen**

**TOTAL**

**Euro**

**Yen**

**TOTAL**

1. Contingent liabilities in foreign currency

 

 

0

 

 

0

1.a. Collateral guarantees on debt due within 1 year

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.b. Other contingent liabilities

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Foreign currency securities with embedded options

 

 

0

 

 

0

3. Undrawn, unconditional credit lines

 

 

0

 

 

0

*3.a. With other central banks*

 

 

 

 

 

 

*3.b. With banks and other financial institutions*

 

 

 

 

 

 

*Headquartered in the U.S.*

 

 

 

 

 

 

*3.c. With banks and other financial institutions*

 

 

 

 

 

 

*Headquartered outside the U.S.*

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Aggregate short and long positions of options in foreign

 

 

 

 

 

 

Currencies vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar

 

 

0

 

 

0

*4.a. Short positions*

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.a.1. Bought puts

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.a.2. Written calls

 

 

 

 

 

 

*4.b. Long positions*

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.b.1. Bought calls

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.b.2. Written puts

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

**Notes:**

1/ Includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (SOMA), valued at current market exchange rates. Foreign currency holdings listed as securities reflect marked-to-market values, and deposits reflect carrying values.

2/ The items, "2. IMF Reserve Position" and "3. Special Drawing Rights (SDRs)," are based on data provided by the IMF and are valued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate for the reporting date. The entries for the latest week (shown in italics in the table above) reflect any necessary adjustments, including revaluation, by the U.S. Treasury to the prior week’s IMF data.The IMF data for the prior week are final.

3/ Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce.
