---
title: Treasury Names Private Sector Coordinator for Critical Infrastructure Protection Partnership Effort
date: 2002-05-14
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3100
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Treasury Department today announced that Rhonda E. MacLean of Bank of America has been named as the private sector coordinator for a partnership between the government and the financial services industry to strengthen critical infrastructure protection initiatives that will protect the U.S. financial sector and economy from attack.



Treasury has lead-agency responsibility for the financial services sector with regard to critical infrastructure protection. Additionally, Treasury Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions Sheila C. Bair chairs the Financial and Banking Information Infrastructure Committee (FBIIC) of the President's Critical Infrastructure Protection Board, which includes state and federal financial regulators and a representative from the Office of Homeland Security.



Ms. MacLean will work with Treasury's financial sector liaison, Assistant Secretary Bair, and the FBIIC to draw together industry initiatives and coordinate private sector outreach related to critical infrastructure protection and homeland security.



Ms. MacLean joined Bank of America in 1996 as Senior Vice President and Director of Corporate Information Security and is responsible for providing global leadership for information security policy, procedures and corporate standards, awareness programs, risk management, and information security technology implementation.



In addition, she is responsible for enterprise business continuity and the company's regional recovery centers. Prior to joining Bank of America, Ms. MacLean was with the Boeing Company from 1982-1996, where, as Senior Manager for Computing and Communications Security, she was responsible for all commercial and government program information security initiatives.
