---
title: James Carter Joins Treasury’s Economic Team as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Policy Coordination
date: 2002-11-04T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3596
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy Richard Clarida today announced that James Carter will join the Office of Economic Policy on Monday, November 4th as the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Policy Coordination.

“James brings an extensive background in economic policy to the Treasury Department,” stated Richard Clarida, Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy.  “His previous experience at the National Economic Council combined with his tenure on Capitol Hill makes him an invaluable asset to the Office of Economic Policy.”

Most recently, Mr. Carter served as an Associate Director for the National Economic Council where he assisted with the formulation and implementation of economic policy. He also managed policy coalitions and served on a White House working group on government waste and business subsidies.

Before joining the NEC in February 2001, Mr. Carter served as a senior economist on the staff of Congress’ Joint Economic Committee.  He has also served as an economic and budget advisor to Senator John Ashcroft (R-MO) and RNC Chairman Haley Barbour.  In early 2000, at the invitation of the Russian government, Mr. Carter traveled to Moscow as part of a small international advisory team to assist President Vladimir Putin’s transition staff with economic and budget matters.

Mr. Carter’s extensive writings have appeared in more than two dozen publications, including USA Today, The Washington Times, Investor’s Business Daily, National Review, and The Weekly Standard.

He holds a B.S. in Political Science from Truman State University and a Master of Public Administration from George Mason University.
