---
title: STATEMENT OF PAUL SPELTZ NOMINEE FOR UNITED STATES EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FOR THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS UNITED STATES SENATE
date: 2002-06-26
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3208
---
*(Archived Content)*

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator Allen and Members of the Committee. I am deeply honored for having the privilege of sitting here before you to be considered for confirmation by your esteemed committee. I, of course, also feel very honored to have been nominated by President Bush to serve as the Executive Director of the Asian Development Bank (ADB).

Before proceeding, and with the Chairman’s permission, may I introduce you to, and comment on my family members? My wife Renee is the stabilizing force in my life, helping me to keep my feet on the ground, family priorities in order, and my shirt collars properly turned down. A difficult task for her, at best, many times, and I thank her for many years of love and support. Also, with your indulgence Mr. Chairman, although not present due to work obligations and long travel, I thank our three grown children, Matthew, Alec and Jessica, spread across the State of Texas and into California, my sister Karen, brother, David and father, Eugene, spread across the east coast of the US for their long distance support this important date. I also wish to note my mother, Elizabeth, who, with my father, was a guiding light in my life, as it is the case with most of us. She was totally committed to be here with us today in this Chamber, but most unfortunately she died recently. I am however, confident, that she is here in spirit.

The ADB is a very important partnership for the United States, especially during these critical times. The responsibilities of this institution include over half of the world’s population and such countries as Afghanistan, Pakistan, and India, all of which figure so predominantly in today’s headlines. The underlying role of the ADB is to reduce poverty and increase economic growth. It must do so through economic programs that enhance human development, private sector growth, good governance, transparency, and the environment.

Mr. Chairman, I have witnessed first hand heart wrenching poverty. However, I have also been encouraged over the decades by the growth in the standard of living of many of the countries in which I have worked. Additionally, I hope to continue to see a move to many of the principles and freedoms that we enjoy and advocate in the USA.

If confirmed for this position, I would utilize the skills and lessons learned over some 30 years of working, living and traveling throughout much of this region of the world. I am an experienced multinational, culturally sensitive negotiator, and hands on executive.

Thank you again Mr. Chairman for your time and the privilege of appearing here today. I would be pleased to answer any questions you or the members of the Committee may wish to ask of me.
