---
title: 'Treasury Secretary and Relevant Bureaus Praise President Bush For His Plan To Create A New Cabinet Agency: The Department Of Homeland Security'
date: 2002-06-06T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3159
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Statement by Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill ** I applaud President Bush for his bold plan to concentrate our homeland security resources in a single Cabinet department. The President has demonstrated real leadership, recognizing the new challenges we face and redesigning our system to rise to those challenges. I fully support this plan to integrate our resources into one collaborative, efficient and nimble structure to focus solely on protecting the American people. I look forward to working closely with the Congress and acting quickly to make America safer.** Statement by Undersecretary for Enforcement Jimmy Gurule ** President Bush's plan to consolidate homeland security resources in one cabinet department reflects his strong leadership in America's war against terrorism. This bold proposal demonstrates that protecting the American people is of the highest priority to this Administration. I look forward to working with Secretary O'Neill and the Congress to ensure a speedy implementation of the President's plan.** Statement by Commissioner of Customs Robert C. Bonner ** I applaud the vision of President Bush and unequivocally support his bold proposal to create a Department of Homeland Security, which will include the entire U.S. Customs Service. I am proud of the vital role the employees of the U.S. Customs Service have played and will continue to play in defending our nation's homeland.** Statement by United States Secret Service Director Brian L. Stafford ** The Secret Service wholeheartedly supports President Bush’s new plan and is excited to join the ranks of this new agency that will work in a coordinated effort to make America safe. Since 1865, we have had a proud history of serving America as a bureau of the Department of Treasury, and we look forward to building on that legacy with the Department of Homeland Security.
