---
title: 'Important Message for Media Events at U.S. Treasury Department Media Coverage at Treasury Department: September 25-26-27'
date: 2002-09-24
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3452
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill will host a number of opportunities for media in the Department of the Treasury during -- and in advance of -- the Annual Meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund.  Members of the media wishing to cover the press conferences must make proper arrangements to enter the Treasury Building and Treasury grounds during the weekend.

  

The Treasury Building and grounds are secure facilities.  Members of the media who do not possess an active Treasury or White House press identification and who are expected to cover either press conferences or photo opportunities must receive clearance from the Secret Service in a timely manner in order to enter the building or the grounds.

  

As always, information required for security clearance includes the individual's full name; date of birth; social security or (if applicable) passport number; name of news organization; and official telephone number.

  

Press with camera equipment should come in through the Moat Entrance. The Moat Entrance is located at the Southwest corner of the Treasury Building.



This information should be provided to the Office of Public Affairs no later than 24 hours prior to an event.



The best way to provide this information is to email[PublicAffairs@do.treas.gov](mailto:PublicAffairs@do.treas.gov).Or fax to 202-622-1999.



Please see attached list of events open for media.



PO-3452

  

**THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 26**

  

Treasury Secretary Paul O’NeillAfghanistan Reconstruction Steering Group MeetingRemarks9:00 a.m. EDTWorld Bank, Building JWashington, DC

  

Treasury Secretary Paul O’NeillPre-G7 Press Conference2:00 p.m. EDTTreasury Department, Media Room 41201500 Pennsylvania Ave., NWWashington, DC

  

**FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 27**

  

Western Hemisphere Finance Ministers Meeting9:00 a.m. EDTTreasury Department, Media Room 41201500 Pennsylvania Ave., NWWashington, DC**Photo spray at top of the meeting**

  

Western Hemisphere Finance Ministers10:30 a.m. EDTGroup PhotoTreasury Building1500 Pennsylvania Ave, NWWashington, DCPool reporter**( Bell Entrance**)



Treasury Secretary Paul O’NeillWestern Hemisphere Finance MinistersPress Conference**1:00 p.m. EDT**Treasury Department, Media Room 41201500 Pennsylvania Ave., NWWashington, DC

  

G7 Ministerial Meeting3:00 p.m. EDTBlair House1651 Pennsylvania Ave., NWWashington, DC**Photo spray at the top of the meeting **

  

G7 Ministerial Meeting4:30 p.m. EDTBlair House, West Garden1651 Pennsylvania Ave.,NWWashington, DC**Group Photo **

  

**SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 28**



****



Treasury Secretary Paul O’NeillInternational Monetary Fund Conference Meeting8:00 a.m. EDTInternational Monetary Fund700 19 Street, NWIMF- 3rd Floor Meeting Hall*Statement for releaseWashington, DC

  

Treasury Secretary Paul O’NeillPost G7 Press Conference***9:30 a.m. EDT**The World Bank, Room**MC4-800**



701 19th Street, NW



Washington, DC

  

Treasury Secretary Paul O’NeillInstitute for International Finance7:00 p.m. EDTGrand Hyatt, Independence Ballroom1000 H Street, NW* Statement for releaseWashington, DC



**SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 29**



****



Treasury Secretary Paul O’NeillAnnual Meeting Plenary Session of the IMF/WB9:00 a.m. EDTStatement for releaseConstitution Hall1776 D Street, NWWashington, DC
