---
title: Raymond T. Wagner, Jr. Nominee for IRS Oversight Board
date: 2002-11-14
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3625
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill today announced that Raymond T. Wagner, Jr. of Missouri has been nominated to be a member of the Internal Revenue Service Oversight Board, for the remainder of a four-year term expiring September 14, 2004. Members of the IRS Oversight Board oversee the IRS in its administration, management and conduct.



“Ray’s unique background as a tax commissioner for both Missouri and Illinois makes him an ideal candidate for the IRS Oversight board,” said Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill. “His private sector, academic and government experience would be an asset to the Oversight Board in their efforts to improve the IRS.”



Ray served in the cabinet of Illinois Governor Jim Edgar as the Illinois Director of Revenue from 1993 until June 1995.  Ray served as the Director of the Missouri Department of Revenue from 1991 to 1993.  He is believed to be the first individual to have been appointed Director of Revenue by Governors of two different states.Mr. Wagner is currently the Legal & Legislative Vice President for Enterprise Rent-A-Car and has been with Enterprise since 1995.



Ray earned his Bachelor of Arts degree (1981) and his M.B.A. degree (1984) at St. Louis University.  He obtained his J.D. law degree (1985) from University of Missouri-Kansas City School of Law and completed a Master of Laws-Taxation (LL.M.) degree (1993) from Washington University School of Law.



Since 1993, Ray has been an Adjunct Professor of Law at Washington University School of Law where he co-teaches a graduate level course on state and local taxation.   In April 1999, Ray was appointed to serve as a Municipal Judge for the City of Ballwin.



Previously, Ray served as Chief Legal Counsel to the Governor of Missouri, and as the General Counsel for the Missouri Department of Revenue.Ray serves on a number of civic and educational organizations.  While in government, Ray was active on numerous boards and commissions, including the Federation of Tax Administrators, the Multi-State Tax Commission, and the Missouri Military Advisory Commission.  He also chaired the Missouri Governor’s Ethics Committee.



A member of the American Bar Association, the Illinois Bar and the Missouri Bar, Ray is admitted to practice law before the US Supreme Court, the US Court of Appeals - 8th Circuit and the US Tax Court.
