---
title: Treasury Secretary O'Neill Announces New Members of the Taypayer Advocacy Panel Treasury Expanded Program to All 50 States
date: 2002-10-08
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3515
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Treasury Department and the Internal Revenue Service today announced the selection of 102 members who will serve on the new nationwide Taxpayer Advocacy Panel (TAP).  This program has been significantly expanded to all 50 states. The TAP members will represent the concerns of taxpayers and identify issues that should be addressed and provide critical input to the IRS.



“The new panel members have an important job to make sure that the IRS provides world-class service to taxpayers. Now that we have expanded the Taxpayer Advocacy Panel to all 50 states, we can ensure that taxpayers from every corner of the country will have their voices heard,” stated Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill.



Treasury Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy, Pam Olson, met with the new members of the Taxpayer Advocacy Panel. (The full text of the remarks are available at[www.treasury.gov](http://www.treasury.gov/))



“On behalf of the President Bush, Secretary O’Neill, and the Treasury Department, I thank you for volunteering your time, your energy, your talent, and your experience to this effort,” stated Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Tax Policy Pam Olson.



“The President has spoken of the value of volunteerism in America, and he has urged Americans to volunteer to help their neighbors, their communities, and their government.  Never has this been more important.  You have all volunteered to serve and your work is essential to ensuring a more taxpayer-friendly IRS.”



The TAP program will work directly with the National Taxpayer Advocate’s Office on issues identified by the Taxpayer Advocacy Panel. The National Taxpayer Advocate is the taxpayers’ representative within the IRS and reports directly to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue and to Congress through an annual report.



Taxpayer Advocacy Panel (TAP) members will:



• Get direct input from taxpayers about their experiences with the IRS.• Identify and prioritize issues of greatest concern to taxpayers.• Make recommendations to the IRS and Treasury on customer-service issues.• Work with the IRS to help taxpayers address key issues and concerns.• Report annually to Treasury and the National Taxpayer Advocate.



Membership slots were determined based on the taxpaying population per state.  Each state has at least one member.



TAP members are U.S. citizens who devote about 300 hours during the year to the panel.  Professions represented in the membership include tax professionals (tax attorneys and accountants), professors, retired military, small business owners, and one former state legislature member.



Attached is a list of the new Taxpayer Advocacy Panel members.



Taxpayer Advocacy Panel Members



ALABAMAFrancis (Buck) J. PaoloneHoover



ALASKABruce TwomleyJuneau



Sherry WhahAnchorage



ARIZONAGregory J. MaciullaTucson



ARKANSASSteven WoodLittle Rock



CALIFORNIANorma BishopSanta Barbara



Yvonne Gallegos-BodleOxnard



Curtis FeeseCovina



Cheyanna L. JaffkePlacentia



Christopher LowePlacentia



Michelle NelsonMission Viejo



Howard PerkinsSuisun City



Charles TaylorSan Diego



COLORADORichard A. CormierAlamosa



DELAWAREPatrick McCombieWilmington



DISTRICT OF COLUMBIATheodore Perros



FLORIDAMary Lou BeyreisJacksonville



Gwen HandelmanFt. Lauderdale



Edward HannaTemple Terrace



Keith JohnsonJacksonville



Sharon LassarMiami



Owen Oatley’Holly Hill



George SullivanN Fort Myers



GEORGIACharlotte CassadyTalbotton



Tim D. JarrellKennesaw



HAWAIIClayton AgenaHonolulu



ILLINOISRobert M. BurkeChicago



Robin GausebeckRockford



Richard GreenbergHinsdale



Lawrence LexowEdwardsville



INDIANACarl HansenIndianapolis



Teresa SmedleySalem



IOWADenise BiggerAlbia



KANSASNan WilsonOverland Park



LOUISIANAHelen CurolLake Charles



MAINECatherine J. KellyCorinth



MARYLANDGeorge PruchniewskiBaltimore



Faith VinikoorBaltimore



MASSACHUSETTSCharles W. SilvaOrleans



MICHIGANLeslie R. MalcolmsonDetroit



Nancy QuarlesSouthfield



MINNESOTALaura De MaraisMinneapolis



Thomas P. SeuntjensWayzata



MISSISSIPPIPhil BryantBrandon



MISSOURILinda BaderChesterfield



Kenneth LoganBlue Springs



NEVADAJustin DoucetteLas Vegas



NEW HAMPSHIREAbigail AliceaNashua



NEW JERSEYAnthony DiMartinoToms River



Robert MaziarzHainesport



David MeyerVoorhees



Leonard SteinbergWest Windsor



NEW MEXICOMario BurgosCedar Crest



NEW YORKAimee Gomlak BraceBuffalo



Walter FishBellmore



James GrimaldoBrooklyn



Paul NagelGlen Cove



Shamsey OlokoStaten Island



NORTH CAROLINAMary BalmerChapel Hill



C. Morgan EdwardsCharlotte



NORTH DAKOTAPaul W. SmathersEdgeley



OHIOBrig Gen. (ret) James Abraham, P.E.Gahanna



Frank ClaudmanWarrensville Heights



Thad DavisVan Wert



OKLAHOMAPatrick CastleberryOklahoma City



OREGONVirginia SymondsPortland



PENNSYLVANIAGerald G. Gensiejewski, Jr.Newtown



Manning Mosley, IIIWayne



Doreen ScottPittsburgh



RHODE ISLANDDiane MignanoNorth Kingstown



SOUTH DAKOTAJohn HollingsworthAberdeen



TENNESSEELarry BarnardMorristown



Linda MillerMemphis



TEXASMaria J. Hermann-ParienteEl Paso



Roejeana WarrenDallas



Lillian WooBryan



UTAHSharon StetzSalt Lake City



VERMONTEkileen ShumanBrattleboro



VIRGINIAKaren KerriganVienna



Calvin K. JohnsonNorfolk



WASHINGTONChristopher ForzanoVancouver



Joseph RederRichland



WISCONSINDaniel DrumelWind Lake



Glenn HallMadison



Robert MeldmanMilwaukee
