---
title: Under Secretary for Enforcement Jimmy Gurulé Press Conference
date: 2002-03-13
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po1097
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Treasury Under Secretary for Enforcement Jimmy Gurulé will host a press conference and signing ceremony in the Diplomatic Reception Room at the Department of the Treasury on Thursday, March 14, 2002, 10:30 a.m., EST. **

Senior Officials of the Black Market Peso Exchange (BMPE) System Multilateral Working Group will sign a statement that recommends short and long term actions to combat the biggest money laundering system in the Western Hemisphere.



The Black Market Peso Exchange System Multilateral Working Group was established in 1999 to combat this black market peso exchange system which is believed by U.S. law enforcement to launder between $3 to $6 billion a year. Participants will be available for a few minutes to answer questions from the press.



Mr. Gurulé will be joined by: Nilo J.J. Swaen, Minister of Finance of the Ministry of Finance of Aruba, Mr. Luis Alberto Moreno, Ambassador of Colombia to the U.S., is representing Mr. Santiago Rojas Arroyo, Colombian Director General, National Tax and Customs Directorate; Mr. Guillermo A. Ford, Ambassador of Panama to the United States, is representing Mr. Jose Miguel Aleman, Minister of Foreign Relations for Panama; and Dr. Jose Luis Perez Castillo, Director of the Anti-Money Laundering Unit of Venezuela will represent Dr. Mildred Camero, President of the National Commission Against Illicit Use of Drugs of Venezula



Media without Treasury or White House press credentials planning to attend should contact Treasury's Office of Public Affairs at 202-622-2960, by close of business Wednesday, March 13, 2002 with the following information: name, social security number and date of birth. This information may also be faxed to 202-622-1999. For additional information about the event, please contact Tasia Scolinos of Treasury Public Affairs (202) 622-1996.
