---
title: Treasury Secretary O'Neill Announces Wenzel to Serve
date: 2002-10-15
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3536
---
*(Archived Content)*

Today, Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill announced that Bob Wenzel, Deputy Commissioner, Internal Revenue Service, will serve as the Acting Commissioner, upon Commissioner Rossotti’s departure on November 6, 2002.



“I am pleased that Bob will serve as the Acting IRS Commissioner,” stated Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill. “We're fortunate to have such an experienced person on board.  Bob will provide continuity of leadership for this transition period, and keep the IRS on the course Commissioner Rossotti charted.  It is important to not turn back the clock, but rather keep forward momentum going and progress on track.”



Mr. Wenzel has served as the Deputy Commissioner of Internal Revenue since 1998. He is the highest-ranking career official in the Internal Revenue Service, with responsibility for the day-to-day operation and strategic management of the United States tax administration system.  As the top career advisor to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, he directs all major decisions regarding the operation of the agency and has ultimate responsibility for management and oversight of the nation’s tax administration system.  In this capacity, he is responsible for IRS programs that annually respond to over 124 million customer service contacts, process over 227 million tax returns, issue 182 million tax refunds, account for $1.9 trillion in revenue receipts, examine 815 thousand returns, collect $32 billion in delinquent taxes, and investigate 4,000 tax fraud and related financial crimes. Mr. Wenzel first joined the IRS in 1963 as a Revenue Officer in Chicago.
