---
title: Administration Announces Bipartisan Agreement on Charitable Giving Tax Incentives
date: 2002-02-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po995
---
*(Archived Content)*

Today, President Bush, Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill and Senators Lieberman and Santorum announced a compromise bill, The Charity Aid, Relief, and Empowerment Act of 2002 (CARE) that includes many of the charitable giving tax incentives sought by the Administration, as well as elements of the Administration's faith-based initiative that provide direct support to groups aiding the poor and the needy.



In the aftermath of September 11th, many Americans have eagerly reached out to support their favorite charities and non-profits. At the same time, the recent decline in the economy has pinched many hardworking Americans' pocketbooks---making it more difficult to contribute those precious dollars that charities rely on to continue their good works, said Secretary Paul O'Neill. As the economy begins to rebound, we must seize this window of opportunity to provide incentives to encourage all Americans to support charities.



Currently, approximately two-thirds of tax filers who make charitable contributions do not get the benefit of a charitable contribution deduction because they don't itemize. This bipartisan CARE Act will allow taxpayers that don't itemize to deduct charitable contributions in addition to claiming the standard deduction.



The CARE Act makes it easier for those who already give, to continue giving, and it will encourage people who don't currently make charitable contributions, to start, O'Neill continued.



The CARE Act will allow tax-free withdrawals from IRAs for charitable contributions for individuals over the age of 67. Rather than the individual making the withdrawal, including it as taxable income, and then claiming the charitable deduction, the individual can just make the tax-free withdrawal contribution directly to the charity.



This vastly simplifies the complexity these donors face today, said Secretary O'Neill.



Many charities also rely on the support of corporate charitable contributions. To encourage corporations to increase their amount of support, the CARE Act increases the limit for corporate charitable contributions from 10% to 13% in 2002 and 15% in 2003.



I want to thank Senators Santorum and Lieberman for their work and I look forward to working with Congress to get this CARE Act passed into law to help Americans give---and to help charities grow, O'Neill concluded.

**  HIGHLIGHTS OF THE CHARITY AID, RELIEF, AND EMPOWERMENT ACT OF 2002 (CARE)**

Many of the provisions in the CARE Act are in effect for two years--the changes aren't permanent, but they are a step in the right direction and will provide relief to charities at a time when the need for their services is great.





This proposal would encourage donations of otherwise taxable IRA assets to charity, by eliminating the need for taxpayers first to include the taxable amounts in income, and then claim an offsetting charitable contribution deduction. Because not all taxpayers can deduct the full amount of their charitable contributions, current law effectively discourages some taxpayers from donating IRA assets to charity.
