---
title: TREASURY SECRETARY ANNOUNCES TRIP TO UKRAINE, KYRGYSTAN, UZBEKISTAN, AND GEORGIA
date: 2002-07-09T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3238
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill will travel to Ukraine, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, and Georgia, July 10-18, 2002.

During high-level discussions with a wide array of senior government officials and private sector political, financial and economic experts, Secretary O'Neill will focus on how to accelerate private sector investment, growth, and job creation to raise living standards in this region.  He will examine, first-hand, bilateral and multilateral assistance efforts, and will emphasize the importance of measuring results to ensure that we direct assistance where it is most effective.  He will pay particular emphasis on efforts to provide financing to new small and medium-sized businesses.  He will highlight the role of regional integration and trade in spurring growth, both within the region as well as with large markets to the East and West.

Following on the heels of his trip to Africa, Secretary O’Neill will continue to share his views on and learn more about development and Millennium Challenge Account issues - leadership and governance, market reforms, and health and education - and how they apply to governments, businesses, and people in these four nations.

Further, Secretary O'Neill will continue to build and deepen our relations with our allies in this region in the economic front on the war against terrorism.  Economic development and strong democratic institutions are strong safeguards to prevent extremism from taking root.

This is Secretary O'Neill's first visit to the region.

Undersecretary for International Affairs John Taylor will accompany Secretary O'Neill.
