---
title: TREASURY EXPANDS TAXPAYER ADVOCACY PANEL TO ALL 50 STATES Applications now being Accepted Deadline to Apply is May 20
date: 2002-04-29
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3049
---
*(Archived Content)*

Today the Treasury Department announced that the Taxpayer Advocacy Panel (TAP), aimed at making the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) better aware of taxpayer interests, is being significantly expanded from 10 to all 50 states. TAP members will identify customer service issues that should be addressed and provide critical taxpayer input on IRS initiatives.

My goal is for the IRS to provide world-class service to the taxpayers. One of the most vital things we can do is listen better to citizens' concerns and suggestions. By expanding the Taxpayer Advocacy Panel to all 50 states, we are taking an important step to ensure that taxpayers from every corner of the country will have their voices heard, stated Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill. After all, we work for them, and not the other way around.

The TAP program will work directly with the National Taxpayer Advocate's Office to identify and work on issues identified by the Taxpayer Advocacy Panel. The National Taxpayer Advocate is the taxpayers' representative within the IRS and reports directly to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue and to Congress through an annual report.

We look forward to working with taxpayers in improving the customer-service focus of the IRS, stated Nina Olson, National Taxpayer Advocate. Working with taxpayers directly will help us identify issues that may not be on the IRS radar screen.We can also hear their concerns about issues the IRS is already addressing.

Taxpayer Advocacy Panel (TAP) members will:

To qualify as a TAP member, applicants must be U.S. citizens, be able to make a significant time commitment to the panel, and meet certain other eligibility requirements.

Further details and the application are available at*www.improveirs.org*or by calling 1-866-602-2223. Applications can be mailed to:

TAP Recruitment Office7771 West Oakland Park Blvd.Suite 225Sunrise, FL 33351

Applications must be received by the TAP Recruitment Office by May 20, 2002.
