---
title: Improving the Bretton Woods Financial Institutions
date: 2002-02-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po996
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Improving the Bretton Woods Financial Institutionsby John B. Taylor, Under Secretary of Treasury for International AffairsAnnual Midwinter Strategic Issues ConferenceBankers Association for Finance and TradeWashington, D.C.**

One of my responsibilities as the Under Secretary of Treasury for International Affairs is to oversee our relationships with the Bretton Woods Financial Institutions-the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. These institutions, along with regional development banks, are essential instruments in achieving two of the most important international economic policy goals of the United States-*raising economic growth*and*improving economic stability*in the world economy.

Many people think these institutions could be doing a better job than they have been in recent years. I agree with that view. And from the start of the Bush Administration, a high priority has been to improve the performance of these institutions. Last year President Bush, in a speech at the World Bank, and Secretary O'Neill, in a speech at the Detroit Economic Club, called for reforms in these institutions. In my remarks here today, I would like to describe some of the details of our reform strategy and explain the rationale that underlies our specific reform proposals.

**The Past as Prologue: From Post World War II to Post September 11**

Let me begin with a little history. More than 50 years ago, as World War II was drawing to a close, our predecessors in the United States Treasury began thinking about what the world economy would look like after the war. They showed great knowledge and leadership in doing so.

 

They knew that world depression and financial collapse had led to economic nationalism in the 1930s and ultimately to the war itself. They knew that it was in the interest of the United States to establish conditions in the world economy that would prevent a recurrence of such calamities. They saw the need for two new international financial institutions to help carry out this task: (1) a multilateral fund to keep the world financial system running smoothly by preventing crises in payments flows and exchange rates; and (2) a multilateral development bank to help reconstruct the countries devastated by the war. They worked with our allies to actually create two new institutions-the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank-with many of the key discussions taking place in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire. They then convinced the U.S. Congress to authorize and fund the institutions. In later years, the World Bank took on the task of economic development more broadly and was joined by regional development banks. By any measure these institutions were successful in their original task; the post-World War II reconstruction, development, and economic integration was an amazing success.

Simply put, the job of the World Bank today is to help poor countries become less poor - that is, to increase the well-being of people in poor countries. The Bank's mission, I believe, is particularly important after September 11 because poverty can be a breeding ground for terrorism. Improving the lives of people around the world is a priority in and of itself. Our fight against terror makes these investments to improve the lives of the world's poor all the more imperative.

I think it is helpful to think of the current situation this way: We at Treasury should view the post-September 11 period much as our predecessors at Treasury viewed the post-World War II period. They thought it was imperative to create new international financial institutions in part to help prevent another war. We should think it is imperative to reform these same international financial institutions in part to help prevent future acts of terror.

**Productivity and Measurable Results** How are we trying to improve the World Bank? To start, we have suggested two broad themes. One theme is to call for a greater focus by the World Bank on increasing productivity growth. Productivity is the amount of goods or services that a worker can produce in a set period of time, such as a day or a year. The simple truth is that countries are poor because productivity is low in those countries. And countries are rich because productivity is high in those countries. The best way to understand this is to look at a color-coded map of the countries that are poor and the countries are rich. Countries that are poor have low levels of productivity. So if we can improve productivity growth in the poor countries, we will reduce poverty in those countries.

An advantage of the focus on productivity is that we already know a lot about the basic causes of productivity. Low education, low productivity. Low business investment, low productivity. Lack of proper health care, low productivity. So by looking at productivity, you can focus your attention on those areas that really make a difference to people's standard of living.

 

The second broad theme we are emphasizing is measurable results - that is, looking at the activities that are undertaken by the institution and seeing exactly where it makes a difference. And how much of a difference? And compared to what other activity? We have to measure results - higher productivity, more children in school, fewer people with HIV/AIDS - rather than just hope that the results are delivered.

**The President's Grants Proposal** We have made three specific reforms proposals that are meant to deliver on these broader themes. The first is our grants initiative. Last year, in his speech at the World Bank President Bush announced his proposal to take 50 percent of the funds that the World Bank currently provides to the poorest countries in the form of loans and convert them into grants. This is a major initiative; let me try to explain why.

The World Bank, as part of its efforts in poor countries, has a branch called the International Development Association (IDA). What IDA does is make loans to very poor countries. And the terms on these loans are quite remarkable: the loans have a 40-year maturity, the interest rate is 0.75 percent, and there is a 10-year grace period. Now, if you think about it, that's not a loan -- that's a grant. In many respects, it is dishonest to call it anything but a grant. At the least it's misleading.

Moreover, what has happened in recent years is that we have developed a process effectively to write off these loans. It is called the Highly Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) initiative. HIP-ick is the way that it is pronounced. And under the HIPC initiative, these IDA loans are being forgiven. In fact there is a major movement around the world - the U2 rock singer Bono is a major proponent of it - to drop the debt.

You see, at the same time we are effectively writing off old loans to poor countries - countries that have unsustainable amounts of debt already - the IDA program is out there writing new loans. Sure, the terms are very favorable. But the truth is that we know that many of these countries cannot really afford even one dollar more of additional debt.

The idea behind the grant proposal is to say, Look, let's be honest about it. Let's recognize that these countries' loans are probably not going to be paid back anyway. So let's just give them grants. Start educating your children. Improve your health delivery systems. Put in place the basic building blocks of productivity.

Now, to be sure, under the President's proposal grants are not free. In fact, an important advantage of grants is that they can easily be tied to measurable performance or results. For example, if it is a grant for education, then the grant doesn't continue unless enrollment goes up or unless test scores go up, or however else you want to measure the performance. If it's a grant to deliver a better vaccine or deal with HIV/AIDS, then the grant continues as long as the health service is being delivered.

Grants can be tied more effectively to performance in a way that longer-term loans simply cannot. You have to keep delivering the service or you don't get the grant. **Results-Based Replenishment** There is another novel proposal we have suggested to the World Bank - to have shareholders' contributions tied to measurable results. Let me explain a little bit how this proposal works. Every three years, the United States and other shareholders in the World Bank contribute a certain amount to this IDA program. The United States has reduced its contributions to IDA in the 1990s. We intend to reverse this trend. We want to increase our contributions to IDA, but we think it is essential to do so in a way that gears the contribution to results.

In the budget President Bush released this week, he is proposing that the United States' IDA contribution be stepped up from $850 million the first year, to $950 million in the second year, and then to $1.05 billion in the third year. But these increments will only occur if concrete performance benchmarks are met. The stepped-up, results-based replenishment is a new idea. We are very much hoping it will make a difference by providing an incentive for achieving better development results - again, emphasizing the goal of increasing productivity and reducing poverty through whatever means work.

**Private Sector Development** A third major initiative is to encourage more emphasis at the World Bank and the other multilateral development banks on private sector loans, especially to small businesses. The activity of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) has been very effective in Russia and other formerly centrally planned economies. But the mandate of the EBRD is limited to the regions of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. We are working on a new proposal for this type of activity to be undertaken in all developing countries. **Toward More Capital Flows and Greater Stability in Emerging Markets** I'd also like to talk about reforms related to the International Monetary Fund and emerging markets. To have greater economic stability in the world, you certainly have to have greater economic stability in emerging markets. Unfortunately, emerging markets have not been very stable in recent years. There have been many crises. Moreover, the flow of investments going through these markets has declined sharply during the last four years. If you want more countries to experience higher economic growth, you want more funds going through these emerging markets, not less - and ultimately at lower interest rates for countries that are having to pay the interest rates.

So what do you do about this? What possible methods are there? Let me go down the list of things that we are proposing and that I hope will ultimately be effective.

**The Components of an IMF/Emerging Markets Reform Strategy** First is to focus more on crisis prevention. That means asking the IMF to look more closely at countries that have the telltale signs of a future crisis - or close to a situation where economic trends are not sustainable. This also entails giving more ownership of the problems to the countries so that they can make the decisions before the crises get out of hand.

Second, we need to narrow the focus of the IMF. The IMF, in giving loans to countries over the years, has insisted on conditions that go well beyond the expertise and the purview of the IMF -- areas that have more to do with social policy or interfere in the politics of governments. This reduces a country's sense of ownership in a way that is counterproductive. And by narrowing the focus to things like fiscal policy, monetary and exchange rate policy, and financial sector policies, the hope is that the IMF will be able to focus more on preventing crises.

We also want the IMF to make efforts to avoid giving advice that might discourage economic growth. Tax policy is an area that deserves special care. Economic growth can be encouraged by lower tax rates; and the lower rates may encourage more collection and make tax administration easier. A remarkable example, I think, is how Russia instituted a 13 percent flat tax and actually raised more tax revenue. It is worth noting that they did this after their IMF program ended. When Russian authorities were unable to borrow from the IMF (or any other source) and had to make decisions helpful for raising revenues on their own, they chose a remarkably effective reform.

The third part of our strategy is to work to reduce contagion. Contagion refers to the phenomenon that when there is a crisis in one country it spreads to other countries. Many people thought contagion was an important characteristic of the Asian crises in the late 1990s. When we started in the Bush Administration, we looked carefully at this contagion issue and tried to see whether it was changing. And it was pretty clear to us that contagion was declining for a number of reasons. One is that people in the markets were paying more attention to the fundamentals. Another was that countries were starting to be more transparent in their policies. And there was more discerning analysis at investment banks, trading firms, and mutual funds on developments in the emerging market countries.

We tried to comment on this change in contagion because we believed that if people were not so concerned about contagion, then they wouldn't be so willing to bail out bondholders. So, early on in the Administration, we said that we did not think contagion is automatic. We said that if it is there, it is more likely to be based on fundamentals. In fact, we were criticized quite heavily for saying this early on. But I think it has been effective because irrational fears of contagion have come down dramatically over the course of the last year. This is illustrated by the terrible economic situation in Argentina. Despite the tragic situation for the world's largest emerging market debtor, yield spreads have gone down in virtually every other country. People in the markets call this de-coupling. I think it has fundamentally changed the nature of emerging markets and what the official sector response to these crises should be. And, in fact, this also creates the opportunity for countries to have more ownership and responsibility for their problems.

The fourth part of our strategy is to limit official sector support to countries when they reach unsustainable debt situations. Too much official sector assistance reduces incentives for countries to come to the right decisions and it also ends up bailing out bondholders, as I think we've seen in a number of cases. It's only by limiting official sector support that you can prevent both of those things. I think it is clear to people who observe these markets that - although it took us a while to get there - the official sector support is being limited to a significant degree. The reality is that if we want emerging markets to grow much more rapidly in the future, it will be necessary to limit official sector support: the size of the markets will outpace what is politically feasible for the official sector to do.

The fifth part of our strategy regarding emerging markets and IMF reform has to do with creating an alternative to IMF bailouts that countries can use when they get in bad situations. This alternative is to create a more systematic approach to the restructuring of sovereign debt - trying to make restructuring more predictable. When countries get close to the situation where debt is unsustainable, it frequently becomes very cloudy as to what happens next. And in my experience in this job so far I can attest that when a country gets close to a position where things might be unsustainable, too many decision-makers simply must guess what might happen next. There is too much uncertainty.

What is needed here is a more formal workout strategy for countries that reach an unsustainable debt position. Secretary O'Neill called for us all in the international community to work on such a strategy last year. And the First Deputy Managing Director of the IMF Anne Krueger responded, showing great courage in laying out some specific suggestions in detail. In Anne Krueger's proposal, the IMF-at some point when it was clear that a country's debt was unsustainable-would step in and call a standstill-a time out-when the country would stop servicing its debt and at the same time there would be a stay on the legal activities that might occur.

There are alternatives to this proposal. Several alternatives would facilitate the workout of sovereign debt problems by debtors and creditors themselves without a strong IMF role. In my view these alternatives are promising; and they may be easier to implement and more predictable. For example, one could introduce new bond provisions so that when a country gets to a situation where it needs a restructuring, there is a more orderly process for a workout with the bondholders. One could require such provisions as a condition for the use of IMF resources. Of course, introducing new provisions is something one can only do for new bonds. That might not effectively deal with the situation we are in now, so there also may need to be some way to deal with the existing bond provisions. Even with existing bond provisions, there may be ways to create a more predictable workout process that emphasizes private sector decision-making and does not require the IMF to play such a central role. Irrespective of how this discussion turns out, it is essential to get a greater degree of predictability to the workout process, and I think that will make these markets work better in the future.

If you look at what has happened over the course of the year, I think you can point to some progress in our efforts. Contagion in emerging markets has gone down significantly. I hope that continues.

I hope it is a fundamental change. And then finally you have seen-despite the increased uncertainty after September 11 and the situation in Argentina-a decline in spreads for almost all these markets; this is promising. We also have to continue to expand free trade because developing countries will grow more quickly when they are able to trade freely.

It's clear that we still have a long way to go with many of our reforms. Not everyone agrees with our reforms. But no one should doubt our commitment to pursuing them. But I think the progress we have made this year is significant and we intend to be persistent in achieving these goals.
