---
title: TREASURY UNDER SECRETARY JOHN B. TAYLOR TESTIMONY BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY, EXPORT, AND TRADE PROMOTION OF THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS
date: 2002-09-12T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3416
---
*(Archived Content)*

Chairman Sarbanes, Senator Allen, Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the achievements made to date on the Administration’s Multilateral Development Bank (MDB) reform agenda and our specific authorization requests.

My statement will cover the authorizations for the replenishment of the World Bank’s International Development Association (IDA-13), the African Development Fund (AfDF-9), and the Asian Development Fund (AsDF-8), which are the focus of Chairman’s letter of invitation. Though not mentioned in the letter of invitation, I would like to urge your support for the Administration’s pending request for authorization to implement reform of the North American Development Bank (NADBank), along the lines agreed by Presidents Bush and Fox. I also strongly encourage you to support the Administration’s appropriations request for the recently concluded replenishment of the Global Environment Facility (GEF-3), for which authorization is provided by prior legislation. I would be happy to answer any questions about these requests today.

Reform of the MDBs has been one of the highest priorities of the Bush Administration’s international economic agenda. The MDBs are important instruments in helping to raise economic growth and prosperity around the world. But the effectiveness of the institutions in making a difference in the lives of the poor can be substantially improved. The MDBs can and must do a better job. I believe it is our obligation to be demanding of these institutions, to point out their successes and failures. It is our obligation not only to the people of the developing world who desperately need these institutions to be more effective, but also to American taxpayers.

I believe that the American public wants to see results from the funds that we devote to development, and that their support for providing foreign assistance will increase if we are convincing and straightforward in presenting those results.

From the start of the Administration, we have pursued three hallmark reforms – a greater focus by the institutions on increasing productivity growth; an insistence on measurable results; and an increased proportion of assistance to the poorest countries delivered in the form of grants rather than loans. Steady progress has been made on all these fronts, and this progress provides the grounds for the Administration’s authorization requests for the MDBs. Congressional approval of these authorizations will allow us to continue our work to improve these institutions.

President Bush’s appropriations request for the MDBs in FY03 totals $1.437 billion. In the case of the increment for IDA, the authorization request is an 18% increase over the prior replenishment request. Importantly, the requested increase entails a new focus on measuring and achieving results from IDA funding. In fact, for the first time ever, part of the replenishment is contingent on achieving real results on the ground. Absent achievement of progress towards stated objectives, the Administration will not seek appropriations for that additional funding.

**IDA-13: Reforms to Raise Economic Growth in Poor Countries**When the International Development Association (IDA) was first proposed by the Eisenhower administration in 1959, raising productivity was the key goal of the institution. In the words of the very first article of IDA’s Articles of Agreement, The purposes of the Association are to promote economic development, increase productivity and thus raise standards of living in the less-developed areas of the world....The Association shall be guided in all its decisions by the provisions of this Article. More than forty years later, we have a long way to go in achieving these objectives. This Administration believes making IDA more effective demands that, among other things, we refocus IDA on this original mission of raising productivity growth.

The negotiations for the thirteenth replenishment of IDA concluded in early July. This replenishment will enable the organization to provide a total of $23 billion in loans and grants to the poorest countries over the next three years. The Administration is requesting authorization to contribute up to $2.850 billion over the next three years. The FY03 appropriations request consists of $850 million for the first payment under IDA-13 and $24 million to clear one-third of U.S. arrears.

In the IDA replenishment negotiations, the United States achieved agreement on three sweeping reforms fully reflective of the Bush Administration’s MDB reform priorities:

A significant increase in grant funding for the poorest countries;

A contribution scheme that allows shareholders to link the contribution of additional resources to the achievement of results; and

A greater focus of IDA resources on key productivity-driving activities, including private sector development.

First, the IDA replenishment achieves the President’s vision of last summer that up to 50 percent of the funds provided by the development banks to the poorest countries be provided as grants for education, health, nutrition, water supply, sanitation and other human needs. In fact, this landmark replenishment agreement means that IDA will provide nearly 100% of its assistance on grant terms for education, health, nutrition, potable water and sanitation in countries whose people live on less than a dollar a day. All of IDA’s assistance for HIV/AIDS will be in grant form for all IDA-only countries, and up to 25% of such assistance to blend countries (those eligible for both IBRD and IDA) will also be in the form of grants. Up to 100% of IDA’s assistance for natural disaster reconstruction will be in grant form. And up to 40% of IDA’s assistance to post-conflict countries will now be delivered on grant terms.

This is a significant achievement in terms of achieving the Administration’s policy objective of helping poor countries make productive investments without saddling them with ever-larger debt burdens. Equally important, this approach will make a real difference in meeting the basic needs of poor people around the globe without significant costs to IDA.

While an increase in the amount of grants will mean a reduction in IDA repayments over the next 40 years, it is important to note that for the recipient countries, these additional saved costs – which are better referred to as foregone debt repayments – provide real and material benefits. Even in terms of foregone repayments, the amounts are modest and spread out over an extended period of time. Given the grace period attached to regular IDA funding, there is virtually no reduction in the amount of IDA resources available to support borrowing countries over the first ten years.

It will not take much to offset these foregone repayments even after the first ten years. In its recent study on IDA grants, the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) produced an excellent analysis, which was very helpful. I referred to it many times as a way to explain the financial impact of the grants proposal to other donors. It estimated that donors would have to increase their contributions at an annual rate less than the rate of inflation to offset the costs of grants – that is a decline in real terms.

 

Second, another key achievement in the IDA replenishment is a contribution structure that allows donors to increase their levels of funding if concrete measurable results are achieved. Donors and developing countries will benefit from routinely quantifying development achievements and understanding the reasons for success and failure. This will increase learning and accountability for development results.

Donors agreed to measure progress towards two sets of results. The first set involves getting the new measurable results system started. This system must be established and other analytical underpinnings of IDA’s work expanded.

Timely and high quality diagnostic analyses – such as public expenditure reviews, financial accountability assessments, and investment climate assessments – are important tools for identifying the strengths and weaknesses in a country’s ability to make the most effective use of IDA resources. The U.S. will provide an additional $100 million if IDA makes concrete progress in this area.

The second set of results is in the areas of education, health, and private sector development. After careful consideration of both measurability (do the data exist in most IDA countries?) and relevance (do they reflect IDA’s productivity growth and poverty reduction mandate?), progress will be tracked toward the following results:

*Education: Increase in aggregate primary school completion rates across IDA countries as well as an increase in the number of countries that have raised their completion rates. *Increase in aggregate primary school completion rates across IDA countries as well as an increase in the number of countries that have raised their completion rates. *Health: Increase in measles immunization coverage across IDA countries as well as an increase in the number of countries with 80 percent coverage.*Increase in measles immunization coverage across IDA countries as well as an increase in the number of countries with 80 percent coverage. *Private Sector Development: Reductions in both the number of days and the official costs required to start businesses in IDA countries.*Reductions in both the number of days and the official costs required to start businesses in IDA countries.

Reflective of the importance of human capital investment and vibrant private sectors to increasing productivity, the U.S. will provide an additional $200 million if satisfactory results are achieved in the above areas.

It is important to keep in mind that this is just the start of a fundamental shift of focus in the MDBs to measurable results. A new measurement system must be created to implement the results approach; it will begin with a small but important set of indicators. And it will evolve over time as the quality of data and evaluation systems in recipient countries are strengthened and as the MDBs, other shareholders, and developing countries realize that the U.S. priority on measuring results reflects a genuine desire to ensure that the lessons – both successes and failures – of 50 years of development assistance result in more effective assistance and less poverty around the world.

More broadly, pursuing a results-based approach in IDA and the other MDBs will require real changes in operating style. It means stating in quantitative terms the expected results of individual projects and overall country assistance before providing funding. It means measuring progress towards stated results and assessing the reasons for success and failure. It means structuring projects in a way that steps up or cuts back funding contingent on achieving results.

Third, IDA will devote significant resources over the next three years to projects and programs that raise productivity. The logic behind this approach rests in the simple fact that countries are poor because productivity is low. This requires concentrating IDA funding on addressing the basic causes of low productivity such as inadequate education, low business investment, and inadequate health care.

For the first time, IDA funds can be used in the private sector, including increased collaboration with the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the arm of the World Bank Group that provides financial products to private sector projects in developing countries.

African Development Fund

Negotiations for the ninth replenishment of the African Development Fund (AfDF-9) are not yet complete. With strong U.S. leadership, the AfDF negotiators have already agreed on an important set of policy reforms including an enhanced focus on measurable results, an improved link between financial support and results, and deepened coordination with the World Bank and bilateral donors. The AfDF has a good record of making information available to the public, and Management has committed to improving disclosure policies. The institution is also developing specific expertise in the areas of regional integration and governance, and will be adopting a new private sector strategy this year.

Two issues remain – the overall size of the replenishment and the proportion of assistance to be provided as grants. The AfDF is expected to adopt a grants program which is similar to the agreement on grants reached in IDA, with an emphasis on grants for urgent human needs such as education, health, and water and sanitation, linked to country performance and commitment to economic reforms. Discussions to date project a replenishment size of $2.9-3.2 billion to fund AfDF operations over the next 3 years. The Administration is requesting authorization to contribute $354 million over the next three years. This represents an 18 percent increase in funding over AfDF-8.

The African Development Bank has been using its comparative advantage as a regional MDB to participate actively in the on-going elaboration of the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD) initiated by African Heads of State. The Bank will be assisting, in particular, on promoting economic regional integration and improved banking and financial standards.

Asian Development Fund

Important achievements were made during the last replenishment negotiations on the Asian Development Fund (AsDF), including a performance-based system for allocating resources and a Memorandum of Understanding with the World Bank to strengthen collaboration and minimize duplication. More recently, a strategy for combating money laundering and terrorist financing has been developed by the AsDB.

The Asian Development Bank – including its concessional lending arm, the AsDF – has moved quickly to assist Afghanistan, by participating in the multi-donor trust fund and by pledging support to finance the country’s urgent reconstruction needs. The Bank has approved $15 million in grants to support critical capacity-building in key ministries, such as health, education, and agriculture, and to assist with disaster preparedness. In the road sector, we are working closely with the Bank and USAID to accelerate the flow of donor assistance to critical roads.

The Bush Administration intends to implement its MDB reform agenda for the AsDF much as it has with IDA, including the use of grants. Our ability to influence the policy direction of the institution will be helped over time by a reduction in our arrears.

  **Conclusion**MDB reform has been a priority of the Administration from the outset. I believe that steady progress is being made in achieving our key objectives within each of the institutions and that these reauthorizations will allow us to make further progress. Working with the international affairs staff at Treasury, I will endeavor to be demanding and to set high standards for the MDBs in order to make them more effective in raising living standards around the world.
