---
title: IMPROVING THE REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT BANKS BY JOHN B. TAYLOR UNDER SECRETARY OF TREASURY FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS CONFERENCE ON FINANCING FOR DEVELOPMENT REGIONAL CHALLENGE AND THE REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT BANKS INSTITUTE FOR INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS
date: 2002-02-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po1032
---
*(Archived Content)*

Reform of the multilateral development banks has been a high priority from the very start of the Bush Administration. We want to improve the effectiveness of these institutions. We want them to be highly successful in increasing economic growth and raising the living standards of poor people around the world. Reform is an even higher priority since the war on terrorism began last September because the poorest countries are often breeding grounds for terrorism.



In a series of speeches beginning last year President Bush and Secretary O'Neill have put forth an ambitious reform agenda, and Secretary O'Neill will be joining you tomorrow to share this agenda with you. I think we have made a good start on implementing this agenda, especially in the context of the World Bank negotiations to replenish the International Development Association (IDA). We are setting broad themes, making specific proposals, and working with our friends at the institutions and fellow shareholders. The most recent proposal was put forth by President Bush in his 2003 budget: he is calling for a substantial increase in the U.S. contribution to the IDA replenishment, and at the same time insisting that this contribution be tied to explicit performance results.



We are promoting the same broad agenda in the regional development banks-the African Development Bank (AFDB), the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). Of course the specific proposals differ because of the diversity of the regional banks and because of timing differences. It is the regional bank component of our reform agenda that I would like to discuss with you today. In particular, I will discuss our reform themes and three particular reform proposals: grants, results-based replenishments, and private sector development.

**Reform Themes: High Productivity Jobs and Measurable Results**

We have stressed two themes to guide the reform and to set priorities.



The first theme is*productivity growth*. A development strategy will be effective if and only if it raises the growth rate of productivity-the amount of goods or services that a worker can produce in a set period of time, such as a day or a year. It is nearly a tautology to say that countries are poor because productivity is low, and that countries are rich because productivity is high. But there are advantages of focusing on the importance of an economy where workers are employed in high productivity jobs.



We know about what leads to productivity growth. Both practical experience and formal growth accounting studies show that productivity depends on capital-including human capital-and on technology in the broadest sense. Thus higher education and more private investment will raise productivity growth. So will technology transfer and anything that will encourage it, such as a better rule of law to attract foreign investment. If-when considering a loan or a grant-you look at its effect on productivity, that will lead you automatically to focus on activities that will raise living standards and reduce poverty on a sustained basis. We need to go further in emphasizing that economic growth-productivity growth-is the key to reducing poverty. This point is made clearly in a recent report of the Inter-American Development Bank,*The Business of Growth*. I am glad to hear, as President Iglesias states in the preface to the report, that economic growth is the business of the Inter-American Development Bank, and that private investment and the creation of high-productivity jobs are essential...



The other theme we stress is*measurable results.*President Bush emphasizes the importance of being able to measure results in every activity of government, not only the operations of the development banks. By measuring results you can see if a given activity is actually making a difference. And if it is not making a difference then we should change and do something that works. For example, is an education loan or grant raising enrollment, test scores, or literacy? Are the funds really making a difference to children's skills so that their own productivity will increase once they are employed? How much of a difference? Compared to what other kind of educational activity?

**From Concessional Loans to Grants at the Regional Development Banks**

Last summer, President Bush first proposed using more grants at the multilateral development banks. Just last month, he reiterated that proposal. He called on the multilateral development banks to provide up to 50 percent of their assistance to the poorest countries in the form of grants rather than loans. And he indicated that grants are particularly effective for education, health, nutrition, water supplies, and sanitation. Why is this grants proposal so important for our reform effort?



With the exception of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, all the regional development banks have separate concessional loan windows for the poorest countries analogous to IDA at the World Bank. The African Development Bank has the African Development Fund (AFDF), the Inter-American Development Bank has the Fund for Special Operations (FSO), and the Asian Development Bank has the Asian Development Fund (ASDF). Donor countries replenish these windows every few years. This year, replenishments of both IDA and the African Development Fund are underway.



All except a small fraction of this assistance to poorest countries is now in the form of loans. About 98 percent of IDA is in the form of loans; about 94 percent of the African Development Fund is in the form of loans. These loans have terms that are highly favorable to the borrower. The maturities are very long (30 to 50 years, depending on the institution), the interest rate is very low (less than one percentage point), and there is a long grace period. We feel that it is misleading to call such assistance a loan. The total interest and principal that must be paid back is much less, in present value terms, than the amount loaned; to call it a loan is not transparent either for the people who are actually giving or actually receiving the assistance. It is these concessional loans that President Bush wants to move toward grants. Grants are better than these highly concessional loans because they are more straightforward and transparent.



A second reason to convert to grants from loans is that many of the poorest countries now borrowing from the concessional loan windows are part of the Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) initiative. In other words they are very poor countries with unsustainable amounts of debt. Under the HIPC program, the development banks are writing off their loans to these poor countries in order to relieve the countries' debt burdens. However, by creating more loans, even at favorable terms, the development banks are adding to these debt burdens. Grants would not add to the debt burden. Grants are particularly appropriate when countries emerge from conflict and cannot afford to take on loans.



A third reason to prefer grants is that many worthwhile projects do not yield enough of a direct economic return to pay back loans. Grants thus remove barriers for governments to take on such worthwhile projects such as raising enrollment rates for girls or assisting HIV/AIDS orphans. Offering a country a loan rather than a grant to provide assistance to HIV/AIDS patients is obviously inappropriate. President Bush wants grants to be used for health as well as for education, nutrition, water supply, and sanitation.



A fourth advantage of grants is that they can easily be tied to measurable results. The President's proposal is not for free grants, but for grants that are tied to specific performance. A grant for education could be tied to enrollment increases, for example. If the grant were provided for HIV/AIDS, then the government would have to go to another provider if patients are not being treated adequately.



Currently, international negotiations on grants are taking place in the context of the IDA and the African Development Fund replenishments. A new replenishment of the Asian Development Fund and the IDB's Fund for Special Operations are both several years away, though we hope that even before negotiations for new replenishments take place these institutions can begin to explore how existing resources can be devoted to grants. For example, we have proposed that the IDB establish a grant program from the income of the Emergency Loans Program.



There is agreement among major donor countries that a larger proportion of IDA and AFDF assistance should be given in the form of grants. However, there are still differences of opinion about how much should go to grants. Some are concerned that increasing grant assistance too much would adversely affect the soft loan windows by reducing re-flows, the funds paid back by countries with concessional loans. However, the reduction in re-flows would be very small because of the favorable terms on the loans. Also it should be emphasized that it is the poorest countries themselves that pay these re-flows, so that with the current soft loan windows, you have the poor helping the poor.



The U.S. has demonstrated its readiness to come to the table with the resources needed to make a difference in the lives of the world's poor. As I already mentioned the United States is offering a significant increase in its contribution to IDA, a sharp reversal of the last six years during which contributions have declined in real terms. We are also proposing an 18 percent increase in the U.S. contribution to the African Development Fund, the largest increase in dollar terms of any donor.

**Results-Based Replenishments: From IDA to AFDF, ASDF, and FSO?**

Another specific reform proposal is illustrated by this year's U.S. IDA replenishment proposal. It would have our contributions tied to measurable results. In particular the President is proposing that the United States' IDA contribution be stepped up from $850 million the first year, to $950 million in the second year, and to $1,050 million in the third year. But these increments to the U.S. contribution to the second and third year will only occur if there is an improvement in IDA's performance.



This results-based replenishment concept is a new idea, put forth for the first time in the President's budget. It is one example of how we are emphasizing measurable results in our reform efforts. We are hoping it will make a difference and that it will help in getting better measures of performance, toward achieving the goals of increasing productivity and reducing poverty.



We hope that this idea can be used for future replenishments not only in IDA, but also in the regional development banks' assistance for the poorest countries-the ASDF, the AFDF, and the FSO. Already in the context of the African Development Fund negotiations we have been successful in obtaining a commitment to significant improvements in the monitoring and evaluation process to ensure tracking of the achievements of AFDF projects and ultimately real increases in productivity in the beneficiary country.

**Private Sector Development: Bankable Loans to Entrepreneurs**

A third specific reform proposal involves the private sector. Investment by private firms is critical to increasing productivity, employment and economic growth in developing countries. I am very interested in working with the regional development banks to find new ways to support entrepreneurs in emerging markets. Last summer, Secretary O'Neill and I went to Russia and witnessed first hand the positive impact of the EBRD's activities in promoting small business loans by combining donor-funded technical assistance to train bankers with EBRD's loan resources. The Russia Small Business Fund has made over 73,000 loans and disbursed over $760 million for small and micro-businesses in 100 cities and towns throughout Russia since its inception in 1994. A U.S.-sponsored SME Special Fund in Southeastern Europe, established in 2000, builds on this approach and combines it with policy dialogue to engage local officials in removing barriers to SME development and finance.



I believe that the regional development banks can do much more in the area of private sector development. A vibrant private sector cannot develop without a healthy investment climate that provides entrepreneurs with access to capital and incentives to build new businesses. Existing MDB programs have largely failed to integrate policy reform, technical assistance and private investment. We believe that investment climate reforms and capacity building at the government and enterprise level should be at the front and center of development policies. A special focus should be placed on private firms that provide manufactured goods and services for the global market, since these firms are typically conduits for advanced technologies, new ideas and best management practices that are the foundation for sustained productivity growth.



We welcome the World Bank's emphasis on investment climate reform and believe that this should be given high priority in the proposed private sector development strategy. We would like the regional development banks to become partners in this effort. All need to ensure that private sector development is a core element of their lending operations and policy dialogue. To take this initiative further, we are developing a new proposal, which will create incentives for governments to pursue investment climate reforms and which will increase support for private entrepreneurs by the multilateral development banks.

**Free Trade, Capacity Building, and Education**

Freer trade is a*sine qua non *of economic growth and poverty reduction. Freer trade means open markets, which lead to greater sales, which lead to higher profits and greater access to goods and services, all of which leads to increased standards of living. Freer trade also accelerates the exchange of technology, more productive capital inputs and the transfer of best practices.



I see a large role for the regional banks to play in assisting countries to take advantage of growing trade opportunities and in providing technical assistance to put in place necessary policies and capacity to facilitate trade. Yet liberalization alone is not a sufficient antidote for sustainable growth and poverty reduction. Building enabling environments for vibrant private sector and human capital formation is a critical complement. More and better education is an essential element of increasing productivity. Better educated people are better equipped to take advantage of economic opportunities and to address family health and nutrition needs, thereby generating increased individual and national productivity and income. This is why the U.S. has proposed that the MDBs increase the share of their funding and attention devoted to education.

**Concluding Remarks**

In conclusion, I want to thank Fred Bergsten for inviting me to participate in this meeting today and to share some of our ideas with you. I am very glad that Presidents Iglesias and Kabbaj were also able to attend. I look forward to working with all of you to achieve our common objective of increasing growth and reducing poverty.
