---
title: United States, China Officials to Hold Joint Economic Committee Meetings
date: 2002-09-06
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/2002961205317850
---
*(Archived Content)*

On Monday, September 9, Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill will co-chair the annual U.S.-China Joint Economic Committee (JEC) meetings at the U.S. Treasury Department in Washington. Federal Reserve Board Governor Donald Kohn, SEC Commissioner Roel Campos, and OCC Senior Deputy Comptroller Jonathan Fiechter, among others will join Secretary O’Neill in the meetings. In addition to the China’s Finance Ministry, the Central Bank, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Planning Commission, Ministry of Justice, Securities Regulatory Commission, and State Council will also be represented. Combating terrorist finance, financial services liberalization, emerging market development strategies, prison labor, and macroeconomic developments, among other issues, are on the agenda. 

Secretary O’Neill and Chinese Finance Minister XIANG Huaicheng will also meet separately for bilateral discussions.

**Photo opportunities are available at the opening of the JEC meetings at 9:00AM; and at the beginning of the bilateral meeting at 9:30AM. A joint press conference with Secretary O’Neill and Mr. XIANG will occur at the conclusion of the day’s meetings at 5:00PM.Members of the media who do not hold White House or Treasury press credentials should contact Treasury’s Office of Public Affairs at 202-622-2960 with full name, date of birth, and social security number as soon as possible to receive clearance to attend the press conference. Video and still photographers intending to cover the photo opportunities should contact Frances Anderson or Sean Miles to arrange for clearance and recommended arrival times and locations for security clearance.Monday, September 9, 2002U.S.-China Joint Economic Committee Meetings9:00 AM – 5:30 PMU.S. Department of the TreasuryMedia Room - Room 4119Washington, DCPress Conference5:00 PMTreasury Secretary Paul O’NeillChina Finance Minister XIANG HuaichengDiplomatic Reception RoomU.S. Department of the TreasuryWashington, DC Monday, September 9, 2002U.S.-China Joint Economic Committee Meetings9:00 AM – 5:30 PMU.S. Department of the TreasuryMedia Room - Room 4119Washington, DCPress Conference5:00 PMTreasury Secretary Paul O’NeillChina Finance Minister XIANG HuaichengDiplomatic Reception RoomU.S. Department of the TreasuryWashington, DC **
