---
title: Edward R. Kingman Jr. Sworn in as Assistant Secretary of the U.S Treasury for Management
date: 2002-02-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po999
---
*(Archived Content)*

Today at 4:30 p.m. Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill will swear-in Edward R. Kingman, Jr. as Assistant Secretary for Management and Chief Financial Officer in the Department of Treasury.



The U.S. Senate confirmed Kingman on January 25, 2002. President George W. Bush nominated Kingman on September 19, 2001.



As the Assistant Secretary for Management and Chief Financial Officer, Kingman is the senior advisor to the Treasury Secretary and the Deputy Secretary on all matters involving the internal management of the Department and its Bureaus. He serves as the Chief Operating Officer of the Department and he represents the Department to the President's Management Council. His office is responsible for strategic management (planning and budgeting), budget execution and development, financial management, information technology, human resources, procurement, asset management and security. The ASM/CFO oversees all administrative and support services for the Department Headquarters offices. The Treasurer of the United States, U.S. Mint and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing report to the ASM/CFO.



Most recently, Kingman served as President and Chief Executive Officer of EuroTel Praha in Prague from 1998 to 2000, where he developed and led strategic initiatives that more than quadrupled the customer base, grew the private market value by more than $2B USD, and made it the second most profitable company in the Czech Republic. He also launched the first mobile/web portal in Central Europe, the first pre-paid roaming in the world and the first GPRS and high speed 43.2 kB/s data in Central Europe.



While in Prague, Kingman was awarded the Democracy & Free Enterprise Award, as well as numerous community service awards for supporting humanitarian efforts by providing wireless telecommunications at the Tirana, Albanian refugee camp during the Kosovo conflict.



From 1994 to 1997, as Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of Grupo IusaCell in Mexico City, he took the company public on the New York Stock Exchange. Also with Grupo IusaCell, he served as the Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, from 1997 to 1998.



From 1992 to 1994, Kingman was Vice President of Finance-Network, for Verizon Communications (formerly Bell Atlantic). He served with the Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Companies, from 1969 to 1991, in several positions of increasing responsibility including Controller, Executive Director of External Affairs, as well as Treasurer.



Mr. Kingman earned a B.A., from American University in 1970, and an MBA in Finance from American University in 1979. In 1997 he attended the Harvard Business School's Advanced Management Program.



Mr. Kingman currently resides in Maryland with his wife and two children.
