---
title: B. John Williams, Jr. Sworn in as Chief Counsel of the Internal Revenue Service
date: 2002-02-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po998
---
*(Archived Content)*

Today at 4:30 p.m. Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill will swear-in B. John Williams, Jr. as Chief Counsel of the Internal Revenue Service and an Assistant General Counsel in the Department of the Treasury. The U.S. Senate confirmed Williams on January 25, 2002. President George W. Bush nominated Williams on July 3, 2001.



As the IRS Chief Counsel, Williams will oversee the administration of the Federal tax laws. His office is responsible for providing guidance on the correct legal interpretation of the tax laws, representing the IRS in litigation, and providing all other legal support the IRS needs to carry out its mission of serving American taxpayers. His office also drafts regulations, rulings, and other published legal guidance; handles tens of thousands of cases per year in the U.S. Tax Court and bankruptcy courts and works closely with the Department of Justice on other tax litigation in other Federal courts; and provides specific legal advice and determinations to taxpayers and to various IRS offices both before and after taxes are filed.



Most recently, Mr. Williams was a partner at Shearman & Sterling and was responsible for the firm's tax litigation practice. Prior to joining Shearman & Sterling, he was Chairman of the Tax Section at Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, where he lead the tax litigation practice for 10 years. He was appointed to the United States Tax Court in 1985 by President Reagan and served until 1990.



From 1984 to 1985 Mr. Williams was a partner at Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, where he practiced administrative law, specializing in Treasury and IRS matters. He has also served as Deputy Assistant Attorney General, US Department of Justice, Tax Division, from 1983 to 1984. He was initially responsible for appellate litigation before being assigned to supervise the Division's trial litigation. Mr. Williams was also instrumental with respect to settlement recommendations and legislative policy.



He served as Special Assistant to Chief Counsel, Internal Revenue Service, from 1981 to 1983. During his tenure at the IRS Mr. Williams was also responsible for policy and technical review of rulings and regulations.



While an Associate at Ballard, Spahr, Andrews & Ingersoll from 1976 to 1981, his principal areas of concentration included corporate tax planning and tax litigation. He also served as an Attorney-Advisor, United States Tax Court from 1974 to 1976, where he researched and drafted opinions and conference memoranda for the Hon. Bruce M. Forrester.



Mr. Williams earned a J.D., with distinction, from George Washington University Law School in 1974 and a B.A., with distinction, from George Washington University in 1971.
