---
title: '"STATEMENT OF TREASURY SECRETARY PAUL H. O''NEILL AT THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE MEETING April 20, 2002"'
date: 2002-04-20
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3018
---
*(Archived Content)*

Today we meet amid a global economic climate much improved since our last meeting in November. We have much to be thankful for, including our solidarity in combating the scourge of terrorist financing and the clear recovery now underway in the world economy, led by the United States.

**Combating Terrorist Financing** Our principal focus at our last meeting was to begin a process to eliminate the flow of funds that finance global terror. The unity with which the international community has tackled that goal in the intervening months is heartening. Such efforts have brought significant progress to date in severing links that terrorists use to finance their activities. But there is much to be done.

Since September 11, the United States and other countries have taken action to block the resources of many individuals and organizations aiding and abetting terror. Yesterday, the G-7 nations for the first time jointly designated a list of individuals and an entity as financiers of terrorists, terrorist organizations and those who support them and will block their assets. This effort will be continued in the future to increase the joint effectiveness of our actions. The United States is extremely pleased to work with other concerned nations to help ensure that enforcement of UN Security Council resolutions is coordinated effectively. This is an important effort that has been very helpful in addressing the scourge of terrorists, terrorist organizations and those who support them around the world.

The IMF and World Bank are not law enforcement agencies, but protecting the integrity of the international financial system is among their foremost tasks. Thus, within the confines of their mandates, they have a crucial role to play in the fight against terrorist financing and in anti-money laundering work around the globe. The United States commends the IMF and the World Bank for developing an enhanced anti-money laundering and combating financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) assessment methodology.

We believe this is a good step forward toward the essential goal of developing a unified, comprehensive and integrated approach to assessing the FATF Recommendations on terrorist financing and anti-money laundering. While there is more to be done before reaching a final agreement, we are near the finish line - and I hope we can complete this work immediately. In addition, the institutions should also enhance their analytical work on alternative payment and remittance systems, including hawala and non-regulated financial systems more generally.

**Promoting Global Growth** In the United States, positive indicators are piling up, and growth projections for this year continue to be revised upward. Last December, the IMF projected that U.S. growth in 2002 would be on the order of 0.7 percent; the projection now is 2.3 percent. While some risks remain, consumer spending and reduced inventory liquidation are on track to keep growth strong in the near term, and other sectors such as capital investment should provide extra support later in the year.

North America is leading the global economy into recovery, after what turned out to be a very mild downturn. But it is up to all of us to pursue policies - macroeconomic and structural - that will speed the upturn and sustain growth over the long term. More than one engine is needed for the global economy. We cannot be complacent, since downside risks remain. In particular, we need to keep a close watch on the oil market situation.

**Toward a More Effective IMF** Increasing economic growth and reducing instability are fundamental challenges for us all, and the IMF plays a key role in achieving these goals. Given the importance of these objectives, we simply must do our best to equip the IMF to be effective in carrying out its work.

The United States welcomes ongoing efforts to enhance crisis prevention at the IMF. Greater focus on its areas of expertise and higher standards for Fund programs are also key to ensuring that IMF advice is heeded - and that it builds credibility as a successful instrument of growth and stability. Yet no matter how good the IMF's analysis and policy advice are, their impact will be limited if they do not serve to inform the public and markets. We look forward to further progress on transparency in coming months.

Many have pointed out that no matter how hard we all work at preventing crises, we must be prepared to manage crises that may nonetheless occur. Tremendously important discussions are underway on enhancing mechanisms for addressing sovereign payment difficulties. We welcome the efforts by the IMF and many others to lay out new ideas and approaches. As we explore these proposals, I think it is important to move ahead with practical steps that can be taken now to improve predictability and to provide for more orderly restructurings should the need arise. This is why we have proposed that debtors and creditors include in their contracts a comprehensive package of new clauses that would help describe what would happen in the event of a restructuring.

We believe that moving now to insert such clauses in foreign currency sovereign debt is in the interests of the international community as a whole and that incentives encouraging debtors and creditors to do so should be explored. This could serve to complement, rather than supersede, any further work on ways to improve the sovereign debt restructuring process.

The difficulties faced by the poorest countries have been a key focus of the international community this year, including at the Monterrey conference. In keeping with the strong U.S. commitment to working with these countries, President Bush has proposed a substantial increase in U.S. assistance for countries that rule justly, invest in their people, and encourage economic freedom. The IMF has an important role to play in helping countries establish a strong macroeconomic policy framework that provides the basis for increasing productivity and achieving sustained, private sector-led growth.

The last five months have been marked by strong cooperation and a coming together of international efforts on fundamentally important issues. We look forward to continuing in this spirit as we work together in the IMF in the months ahead.
