---
title: ESTABLISHMENT OF U.S. - PAKISTAN JOINT ECONOMIC FORUM PHOTO OPPORTUNITY
date: 2002-04-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3013
---
*(Archived Content)*

**For planning purposes only ** Contact Tony Fratto at 202-622-2960.

On Friday, April 19, 2002, Mr. Shaukat Aziz, Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, and Mr. Paul H. O'Neill, Secretary of the United States Department of the Treasury, will establish the Pakistan-U.S. Joint Economic Forum. Secretary O'Neill and Minister Aziz will sign a memorandum of understanding that will establish the Forum. The Forum will facilitate more regular consultations on economic and financial issues of shared interest to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs and the Department of the Treasury.

Although reporters are welcome to attend, this is a photo opportunity event only; no sound will be provided. Remarks are not planned.

Embargoed copies of a joint statement and the memorandum of understanding will be available in the Treasury Press Room prior to the event.

 

Friday, April 19, 2002

2:30-2:40 PM

Photo Opportunity; no sound; no planned remarks.

Establishment of U.S - Pakistan Joint Economic Forum

Signing of Memorandum of Understanding

Paul H. O'Neill, U.S. Secretary of the Treasury

Shaukat Aziz, Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs, Islamic Republic of Pakistan

The Treasury Department

Diplomatic Reception Room

Washington, DC

Access to the Treasury Building is limited to members of the media with current Treasury or White House press identification. Those without appropriate identification should contact the Office of Public Affairs at 202-622-2960 and provide full name, date of birth, and social security number or passport number for clearance into the building.
