---
title: Connie Patrick Named as New Director of FLETC
date: 2002-08-01T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3309
---
*(Archived Content)*

Today the Treasury Department appointed Connie Patrick as the first woman director to head the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC). Connie has accepted the position during a critical juncture in FLETC’s history, said Under Secretary Jimmy Gurulé. Her extensive experience and commitment to law enforcement will be an invaluable asset to the FLETC in the coming months and years.

Ms. Patrick has been with FLETC for six and a half years**.**She has served as Associate Director in three capacities at FLETC including Training, Administration, and Planning and Development. Ms. Patrick has also worked closely with the Department of Treasury in the development of new training programs and has overseen the implementation of new FLETC programs and technologies to advance consolidated law enforcement training for the Federal government. Before joining FLETC in 1996, Ms. Patrick worked for the State of Florida’s Department of Law Enforcement for thirteen years**,**retiring as Director of the Division of Human Resources and Training.

The FLETC, located in Glynco, Georgia, serves as an interagency law enforcement training organization for more than 70 Federal agencies with personnel located throughout the United States and its territories. This year**,**nearly 50,000 students will be trained in the principles of law, investigation, ethics, financial crimes, and behavioral sciences. The Center also provides training services to state, local, and international law enforcement agencies.
