---
title: Statement by John B. Taylor Under Secretary of Treasury for International Affairs Before the Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere, Peace Corps, Narcotics and Terrorism of the Committee on Foreign Relations United States Senate
date: 2002-04-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po2095
---
*(Archived Content)*

Chairman Dodd, Ranking Member Chafee, members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on relations between the United States and Mexico. As you requested I will focus on the Bush Administration's efforts to improve the performance and effectiveness of the North American Development Bank (NADBank) and its sister institution, the Border Environment Cooperation Commission (BECC).

In Monterrey, Mexico, last month, Presidents Bush and Fox announced a set of reforms to strengthen these institutions' ability to serve the people of the United States-Mexico border region. Today, I would like to discuss these reforms in some detail and elaborate on why they will make these institutions more effective.

I would note at the outset that these reforms should be viewed in the context of the Administration's broader initiative to improve the effectiveness the international financial institutions and to increase the value they deliver for the U.S. taxpayer. I look forward to working with the Congress on our broader international financial institution reform agenda, as well as on the reform proposals I will discuss with you today.

NADBank and BECC: Origins and Experience

The United States and Mexico established NADBank and BECC in 1993 for the purpose of helping border communities cope with the existing shortfall of environmental infrastructure and potential environmental pressures relating to the North American Free Trade Agreement in the US-Mexico border region. The two institutions perform separate, but related functions in furtherance of their common mission. NADBank's role is to arrange financing for environmental infrastructure projects certified by BECC. BECC works with states and local communities to develop such projects for certification.

During its seven years of operation, BECC has certified 57 projects, with a total construction cost of $1.2 billion. During this same period, NADBank has committed $353 million in Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) grant funds for 37 of these projects.

Notwithstanding this activity, the institutions' overall performance has been inadequate and unsatisfactory. NADBank to date has approved only $23.5 million and disbursed only $11 million in loans to projects, despite having $405 million in authorized paid-in capital and a total lending capacity of $2.7 billion.

Experience has demonstrated that the NADBank-BECC structure does not work efficiently. Closely related work is conducted by two separate organizations under the governance of two separate executive boards. The results of this arrangement have included duplication of effort, increased transaction costs, and frequent misunderstandings. Many project sponsors and other stakeholders claim that the BECC-NADBank project approval process is overly complex, too time-consuming and duplicative, particularly (but not only) for small projects and those with private-sector sponsors. Especially frustrating for border state governments has been the overlap among federal, state, local and NADBank/BECC regulatory and environmental review requirements.

The Reform Initiative

President Bush has recognized the need for serious reform. He and President Fox of Mexico, who had also proposed reforms, discussed the subject on several occasions and, in September 2001, they agreed that immediate measures were needed to strengthen the performance of the North American Development Bank (NADBank), and its sister Border Environment Cooperation Commission (BECC), to identify and fund environmental infrastructure projects on the border. They called for a binational working group to consult with key stakeholders and to develop joint recommendations on strengthening the institutions.

Members of the binational working group undertook broad consultations with state governments, local governments, national legislatures, non-governmental organizations and the public in the region. In the United States, the Treasury Department, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the State Department led the outreach efforts. An issues paper was distributed, including via internet, to Congressional staff, state and local governments, and the general public. Public hearings and meetings were held with state and local officials and Congressional staff. Comments received were seriously considered in developing the recommendations that were eventually endorsed by Presidents Bush and Fox in Monterrey last month.

The key recommendations are as follows:

Financial Instruments: To provide a greater level of financial flexibility so that its capital can be used more effectively, the governments have agreed to increase NADBank's ability to extend affordable financing. This will include doubling the size of NADBank's Low Interest Rate Lending Facility, from the $50 million level set in November 2000 to $100 million, and making $50 million of the Bank's paid-in capital available for grant financing.

To provide a greater level of financial flexibility so that its capital can be used more effectively, the governments have agreed to increase NADBank's ability to extend affordable financing. This will include doubling the size of NADBank's Low Interest Rate Lending Facility, from the $50 million level set in November 2000 to $100 million, and making $50 million of the Bank's paid-in capital available for grant financing.

Geographic Scope and Financial Differentiation: To expand the capacity of both institutions to address important binational environmental needs, the geographic scope for BECC/NADBank operations in Mexico will be expanded from 100 km to 300 km from the border. The geographic limit in the United States will remain unchanged at 100 km from the border.

To expand the capacity of both institutions to address important binational environmental needs, the geographic scope for BECC/NADBank operations in Mexico will be expanded from 100 km to 300 km from the border. The geographic limit in the United States will remain unchanged at 100 km from the border.

To ensure that both institutions continue to focus on the priority environmental needs of the immediate border region, this geographic expansion will be coupled with a system of financial differentiation. Specifically, grant financing will be provided to the poorest communities located within the current border region of 100 km in both countries, and up to 25% of low interest rate lending may be made available for projects located between 100 km and 200 km in Mexico. Projects located between 200 km and 300 km in Mexico would be allowed to borrow at standard NADBank interest rates and receive normal technical assistance.

Private Sector: To expand the tools available for financing projects that, among other things, prevent and mitigate industrial pollution, conserve water, improve air quality, and recycle and reuse wastes, a more concerted effort will be made to certify and finance private sector environmental projects.

To expand the tools available for financing projects that, among other things, prevent and mitigate industrial pollution, conserve water, improve air quality, and recycle and reuse wastes, a more concerted effort will be made to certify and finance private sector environmental projects.

Organizational Structure and Process: To improve functional coordination and operational efficiency between BECC and NADBank, the two boards of directors will be replaced by a single board. The new board will have representation from the federal governments, the border states, and the public. In addition, a comprehensive business process review will be initiated to identify ways to improve the overall project design, certification and implementation process.

To improve functional coordination and operational efficiency between BECC and NADBank, the two boards of directors will be replaced by a single board. The new board will have representation from the federal governments, the border states, and the public. In addition, a comprehensive business process review will be initiated to identify ways to improve the overall project design, certification and implementation process.

Support for Sectoral Reforms: Sectoral reforms aimed at enhancing the bankability of environmental infrastructure projects will be leveraged and supported both through technical assistance and policy reform conditionalities attached to project financing.

Sectoral reforms aimed at enhancing the bankability of environmental infrastructure projects will be leveraged and supported both through technical assistance and policy reform conditionalities attached to project financing.

It is also important to note that the Presidents agreed that BECC and NADBank will remain focused on addressing environmental needs in the border region. The institutions will also continue to implement the agreement reached in November 2000 to expand the institutions' environmental mandate into areas including water conservation, air quality, and renewable energy, in addition to the original focus on clean water, the treatment of wastewater, and the handling of solid waste.

Improved Performance with the Reform Initiative

We believe that these reforms will improve the performance of both institutions in several ways:

First, the financial reforms will make NADBank financing more affordable and thus promote an increase in the Bank's project financing activities. The NADBank experience has demonstrated that its original financial framework is unsuited to the financing of environmental infrastructure in a region characterized by high rates of poverty and fundamental structural problems in the utility sector.

Second, the geographic expansion will give NADBank more opportunities to use its capital resources and thus address a greater scope of important environmental issues that affect communities on both sides of the border. For instance, NADBank will now be in a better position to undertake projects in Mexico that improve water use efficiency over a broader geographic area, thereby increasing water supply in shared rivers.

Third, NADBank and BECC should be able to work more effectively with the private sector on projects that will make economic development in the region more environmentally sustainable, which is a win-win proposition for both the environment and economic growth.

Fourth, a single Board of Directors should improve coordination and accountability in NADBank and BECC and will provide unified, consistent policy guidance to the management of both institutions. The Board will have the capacity to enforce the imperative that the management and staff of the two organizations must work together as a team if their common mission is to be achieved. Membership on the Board will reflect a broad range of interests and, for the first time, non-Federal board members will have a role in the decision-making processes of both institutions

Implementation of the Reforms

Implementing the agreed reforms will require great commitment by both governments. I am pleased that implementation efforts are already underway. EPA, State and Treasury have begun planning a time line for implementation, and have initiated discussions with their Mexican counterparts to this end. Important steps include the launching of the business process review, drafting amendments to the BECC-NADBank Charter, and submitting the necessary legislation to the two countries' respective legislatures.

As we proceed, we will continue to consult widely with stakeholders and interested parties. As these implementation efforts get underway, we will emphasize that management at both institutions continue to work hard to process new and existing project proposals to serve the urgent environmental needs of border communities. We will urge them, in the spirit of the reforms, to intensify their efforts to work together in a cooperative and collaborative manner.

Before I conclude, let me note one extremely important point. It is imperative that the Senate act on President Bush's call to begin consideration of Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) by April 22. TPA will help complete both the Free Trade Area of the Americas and our broader multilateral trade agenda. Of particular importance to this Subcommittee is the renewal and expansion of the Andean Trade Preference Act (ATPA) that will likely be joined with TPA. A critical fact that is not well understood is that after ATPA expired, duties on products that would have qualified if not for the expiration of the program were deferred for ninety days. That deferral expires on May 16, at which time all of the duties deferred over those 90 days will be due. The Treasury Department estimates that duties were deferred on 50 percent of the trade that would have been duty-free under the program. It will bring serious duress to U.S. businesses and our Andean partners if all of those duties have to be paid on May 16. And without question, TPA will be a great confidence-builder for the U.S. and the global economy. For all of these reasons I urge the Senate to expeditiously consider TPA.

To sum up, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss NADBank reform and the U.S. Mexico relationship with you today. We intend to submit a legislative proposal to Congress soon and look forward to working closely with you as we proceed to make these reforms a reality. I welcome your views, suggestions, and your questions. Thank you very much.
