---
title: 'Treasury Secretary Paul O''Neill Will Make Return Visit to Japan'
date: 2002-01-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po914
---
*(Archived Content)*



Rebuilding Afghanistan, discussions with Japanese politicaland economic leaders are on Tokyo agenda.

U.S. Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill will travel to Tokyo January 20-24 to meet with senior Japanese leaders and to represent the United States with Secretary of State Colin Powell at an international conference on the economic future of Afghanistan. The visit will give Secretary O'Neill the opportunity to complete a visit that was halted due to the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. 

The aim of the International Conference on Reconstruction Assistance to Afghanistan, to be held on January 21-22, is to refine assessments of Afghanistan's funding needs for reconstruction and development, and to reinforce the political and financial support of the international community. Secretary O'Neill and other U.S. officials will pursue President Bush's commitment to assist in the reconstruction of Afghanistan's economy.



The conference is organized by a Steering Group of donor countries co-chaired by the United States, Japan, the European Union and Saudi Arabia. The Treasury Department and the State Department represent the United States on the Steering Group. The Tokyo conference follows meetings held in Washington and Brussels in recent months.



Secretary O'Neill will remain in Tokyo for a series of meetings with senior Japanese government officials. Secretary O'Neill will exchange views on international financial issues of mutual interest and on the respective economic outlook and policies in the United States and Japan.



Secretary O'Neill will also deliver a lunchtime address at the National Press Center in Tokyo on Wednesday, January 23, 2002. He will return to Washington on Thursday, January 24.



John Taylor, Treasury Under Secretary for International Affairs, will accompany Secretary O'Neill in Tokyo.
