---
title: G7 Meetings Update
date: 2002-04-18
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3012
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Group of Seven Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors will meet in the U.S. Department of the Treasury on Friday, April 19 and Saturday, April 20, 2002.



Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors will hold a working dinner at the Treasury Department's Cash Room during Friday evening. An opportunity for a photo spray will be available at 7:00 PM. This will be the only media opportunity of the evening.



On Saturday, Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors will convene for G7 meetings. At 9:30 AM there will be an opportunity for group photos at the Bell Entrance of the Treasury located on East Executive Drive. Still and video photographers should arrive no later than 8:45 AM to allow for an equipment sweep.



A post-G7 press conference hosted by Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill will take place on Saturday, April 20 at 11:45 AM at the Office of Thrift Supervision Amphitheater located at 17thand G Street, NW. Members of the media with current White House or Treasury passes or IMF/WB credentials are welcome to attend.



The post-G7 press conference will be a live event.



Still and Video photographers should contact Frances Anderson or Sean Miles at 202-622-2960 to arrange for access.



Access to East Executive Drive is limited to those with current White House or Treasury press passes. If are not a current pass holder, please contact Frances Anderson at 202-622-2960 by close of business on Friday, April 19; provide your full name, date of birth and social security number to receive clearance. A security clearance is mandatory.



Contact Frances Anderson at 202-622-2960 if you are not a current pass holder or you do not have IMF/WB credentials.
