---
title: Prepared Remarks at the EMTA Annual Meeting John B. Taylor Under Secretary of Treasury for International Affairs December 5, 2002
date: 2002-12-05
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3672
---
*(Archived Content)*

Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak here today.  It is a pleasure to engage with so many knowledgeable and experienced emerging market participants in one setting.  I have found that frequent and candid discussions between the private and the public sector are essential for good economic policy whether they take place on trading floors, in government offices, on the phone, by email, or at formal meetings like this one. And I want to say that I am grateful for the useful analysis and comments provided by EMTA members and staff-especially by EMTA Executive Director Michael Chamberlin. I hope that my comments can be as useful to you today.

I would like to focus on a topic that many of us have been discussing for the past year-incorporating new clauses into sovereign bonds, clauses that can create a better process for countries and their creditors to follow in the event of a debt workout.  The lack of a clear, well-defined process for sovereign debt workouts is a design weakness in the emerging markets that impedes broader participation in the market.  The uncertainty prevents the market from accurately pricing the risk of a restructuring event.  The uncertainty also complicates official sector and private sector decision-making thereby leaving emerging markets more susceptible to costly and painful crises than they need be.  For this reason, incorporating such clauses into sovereign bonds is an important component of the Administration's overall emerging market strategy.

The goals of the overall strategy are to increase economic growth and reduce economic instability in emerging market countries. To achieve these goals, strong and stable private capital flows to emerging markets are essential.  Unfortunately those flows declined markedly after the increase in the frequency and severity of financial crises in the 1990s.  To restore these flows we are following an action plan that aims to (1) better prevent crises, (2) reduce contagion from crises, (3) limit and clarify official sector financial response to crises, and (4) improve the process of sovereign debt workouts. The incorporation of new clauses into bonds by sovereign issuers and creditors is a key means to achieve the fourth part of this action plan.

The Decentralized Approach

Last April in a speech in Washington I outlined the Administration's proposals for putting new clauses into sovereign debt and I asked for action on its implementation as soon as possible.  The proposals had been under development in the U.S. government since last fall in response to a request by Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill to find a better process for sovereign debt workouts. Others in the private and the public sector had been developing similar proposals.  Indeed, a G-10 working group suggested such an approach way back in 1996. And, as you know, some collective action clauses are already incorporated in emerging market sovereign bonds governed by the laws of the United Kingdom and Japan.  About 30 percent of the total outstanding volume of emerging market sovereign bonds now includes collective action clauses.

Under the U.S. proposal, sovereign bonds governed by the laws of the United States, Germany, and other key jurisdictions would also include collective action clauses.  We stressed the need for a particular type of a collective action clause-a majority action clause that would allow a super-majority of bondholders to alter the key financial terms of a bond.  Over time, the 30 percent of debt with majority action clauses would grow to 100 percent.  The proposal also suggested including new types of clauses-which we called engagement clauses and initiation clauses.  These new clauses would set forth the modalities of a sovereign debt workout. The clauses would provide for early dialogue, coordination, and communication among creditors and a sovereign and limit disruptive legal actions.  Each type of clause-majority action, engagement, and initiation-had the purpose of better defining the sovereign debt workout process and thereby making it more predictable.

We pointed out that this approach was market-based and decentralized in two important senses.  First, the clauses themselves would be developed and agreed to by creditors and the issuers in a decentralized way.  In other words, within the parameters or guidelines in our proposal, sovereign borrowers along with their creditors and their lawyers would work out the details as new bonds would be issued. Eventually, new templates with these clauses would replace existing templates without the clauses. The second way in which this approach was market-based and decentralized is that in the event of a restructuring, the sovereign government and its creditors would work out the terms of the restructuring on their own guided by the clauses but without the involvement of a central group or panel.

The Response from EMTA and Others

Let me emphasize how pleased we were with the reactions to this proposal. Representatives from the private sector stated their general support for the introduction of clauses and have been working to develop the details much as we had hoped. We have made much progress in the last six months.  I very much appreciate these efforts.

The EMTA Position Regarding the Quest for More Orderly-Sovereign Work-Outs (October 17, 2002) is particularly helpful in this regard because it endeavors to lay out a set of details that fit into the broad parameters of the decentralized approach.  The EMTA position emphasizes two principles. First, the clauses must be marketable in the sense that they must be acceptable by the marketplace of issuers and investors.  Second, to the extent that the clauses make bonds easier to restructure, they should not also make defaults and/or restructurings more likely.  We agree wholeheartedly with both of these principles.

Regarding the particular clauses, the EMTA proposal includes a majority action clause, which would permit the amendment and waiver of key bond terms by approval of an appropriate super-majority of bonds outstanding.  The proposal also includes an engagement clause to facilitate constructive dialogue between a sovereign debtor and its creditors when restructuring seems necessary.  And there is also an initiation clause to inhibit precipitous litigation as a practical matter.  With this initiation clause bonds should require 25 percent bondholder vote to accelerate principal for event of default and provide for a 75 percent vote to rescind acceleration.   Note that this last suggestion is a type of majority enforcement provision.

It is also very encouraging to see that many emerging market countries have expressed their support for the decentralized approach.  In early September, the members of the European Union - including Italy, Spain and Sweden, which are all countries that regularly issue in foreign jurisdictions - committed to using collective action clauses in their external sovereign bond issuances.   Eventually we would expect new emerging market members of the European Union such as Poland and Hungary to do the same.  Moreover, the G-7 has not only stated its strong support for the clauses in emerging market countries, it has agreed that G-7 countries that issue bonds governed by the jurisdiction of another sovereign will include collective action clauses.  That is the strongest statement of support for collective action clauses ever issued by the G-7.

2003 is the Year for Action

With all this progress and show of support, the conditions now appear to be ripe for issuers and their creditors, investment bankers, and lawyers to roll up their sleeves and get to work writing new clauses into bonds as they are issued. There are enough emerging market issuers-many with investment grade ratings-expected to come forth in 2003 that the first mover problem should not be a problem. Each issue that proceeds without the new clauses delays the day when we resolve this uncertainty that still hangs over the markets.

I recognize, of course, that there are still some concerns and reservations about incorporating new clauses into sovereign bonds, and that these concerns are holding some issuers and market participants back.  Let me try to address some of the concerns that I have heard.

Concerns

One concern is simply that the clauses are unnecessary-that the current process for sovereign debt restructuring works just fine.  It is true that the market has found a solution in some recent sovereign debt restructuring cases, including Pakistan and Ukraine.  But even in cases such as Pakistan and Ukraine, the process was by no means straightforward.  Uncertainty about how the restructuring would unfold-or even if restructuring could unfold-complicated decision-making and potentially left countries cut off from credit markets for longer periods than they would have been if a more clearly defined process for restructuring had been in place. Clarification of the debt restructuring process would most certainly be helpful in more complex situations.

Ukraine is an interesting case in point.  Ukraine's restructuring is frequently held up as a successful example. But even in this case, complications arose because one of Ukraine's bonds in the restructuring did not have majority action clauses.  As a result, the authorities needed to track down the bondholders and try to secure 100 percent consent to amend the financial terms of their bonds.  This proved especially difficult because retail investors owned a large portion of this bond.  These problems were not insurmountable in the case of Ukraine largely because the authorities had only a small number of external debt instruments outstanding.  But this is not the case for so many other emerging market countries.

Others have raised concerns that the new clauses would not allow for aggregation of debt across different instruments.  It is true that most proposals do not allow for collective action across different classes of debt.  But this does not mean that the process would not work or that it would not provide sufficient clarity to attract additional investors and greatly improve predictability. Even without aggregation, the clauses can be helpful in describing a process for workouts without the added delay of developing a complex aggregation procedure.

Another worry is that the clauses will raise borrowing costs.  But this is at odds with empirical evidence and with comments we have received from many buy-side participants.  By comparing spreads on bonds with and without clauses studies have found that majority action clauses have not raised borrowing costs.  A key advantage, as I already mentioned, of the clauses is that by providing a process for workouts the risk of such workouts can be better priced.  In fact, empirical evidence shows that countries with good credit ratings have had their borrowing costs go down with collective action clauses. Many investors have been favorable towards collective action clauses and have indicated that they would buy bonds with collective action clauses, provided such clauses do not infringe upon the rights of creditors.

Another criticism is that the new clauses would only apply to new bonds and would therefore impact a relatively narrow scope of debt. It would take many years before the entire stock of outstanding bonds was covered. To me this is a reason to get started now. Had the majority action clauses been introduced in New York and Germany starting in 1996, when the idea was first proposed, we would have dealt with a large part of the problem by now.  According to the latest IMF Global Financial Stability Report, from 1996 through the present, there have been about $150 billion in sovereign bonds issued without collective action clauses.

Some have criticized the decentralized approach because it does not appear to be new.  Well, not all old ideas are bad.  But more to the point, our decentralized proposals went well beyond traditional collective action clauses to include both engagement and initiation clauses.  Still others have argued that the rogue creditor problem is not so bad.  To be sure, I did not even mention the rogue creditor problem in my April speech.  What we are trying to address is the current uncertainty and lack of a well-defined process. Clauses requiring agreements by 100 percent of bondholders create more uncertainty and difficulty than clauses requiring 75 percent.

Yet another criticism is that the improved sovereign debt process will only deal with some crises.  It is certainly true that not all crises are related to the sustainability of sovereign debt issued in foreign jurisdictions.  Currency and maturity mismatches in the private sector, exchange rate pegs, poor supervision of financial institutions, and indexed domestic debt are other potential sources of financial crises. We are working in these areas too-and there have been improvements-especially in the areas of exchange rate policy and transparency.  But even if only a few crises could be prevented, reforming the restructuring process should still be a high priority.  Moreover, crisis prevention is not the only goal. The attraction of a broader class of investors to the emerging markets would strengthen the flows of capital and increase economic growth in these countries.

In recent months another concern has been raised about going ahead with the clause approach now.  Namely there are worries about the impact of the recent work by the International Monetary Fund on a centralized sovereign debt restructuring process-frequently called the sovereign debt restructuring mechanism (SDRM)-which would create a supra-national panel or court through an amendment of the IMF Articles.  This concern has been registered, for example, in the EMTA position paper: The possibility of an over-riding bankruptcy regime chills the market-based approach because neither creditors nor issuers know what changes can safely be made in existing documentation.  I would like to address this concern too.

First, let me state the U.S. position on the debate on the decentralized versus the centralized approach. In our view, good public policy requires carefully investigating all alternatives and pursuing the option or combination of options that will work best.  Regarding sovereign bonds there are three main possibilities:  (1) the decentralized approach, (2) the centralized approach, and (3) a combination of the two where clauses are inserted into new debt instrument and a panel or court is created to deal with aggregation and other issues not captured in the clauses. If there is convincing evidence that the decentralized approach does a better job of preventing crises and strengthening capital flows than the centralized or the combined approaches, then the decentralized approach will be the choice supported by the Bush Administration. Similarly, if one of the other approaches can be shown to work better, then that option will be the one supported.There has been a lot of discussion of the SDRM over the past year, but there is as yet no specific proposal.  That is why the G-7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors called for such a proposal by the time of the Spring IMF/World Bank meetings next year. The G-7 has not endorsed the SDRM approach.  It has simply asked for a proposal by the spring of 2003 so that it can consider the pros and cons of this proposal in a rational fashion.

Clearly there are differences between the clause approach and the SDRM. As I have already mentioned, the clauses are much more decentralized than the SDRM.  Also, the SDRM would aggregate claims across different issues while the clause approach would not.  The SDRM would establish a panel or court, while the clause approach would not.   Obviously, the establishment of such a group raises many issues about appointments and accountability that need to be considered carefully.  The SDRM would override existing bond contracts; the clauses would apply to new issues or perhaps to old issues if they are swapped for new issues.  The clause approach could be implemented quickly, while the SDRM approach would require a good deal of time in light of its relative complexity and the need to gain legislative approval, including in the United States.  So there are many questions left to be answered.  What we, and others, have urged is that work be done to raise these questions so that decisions about an SDRM be made in light of a thorough analysis and a full airing and discussion of the issues.

Conclusion

In sum, the introduction of new clauses into sovereign bonds offers an effective approach to reforming the emerging market sovereign debt restructuring process.  We are very pleased about the positive support for this approach expressed by the private sector during the last six months and for the work that has gone into developing the details of this approach. We are also pleased that a number of emerging market countries have expressed interest in the decentralized approach. Given this support and the work that has been done already, I think it is time to begin actually including these clauses.  Although strong reservations about the alternative centralized approach have been expressed, ongoing research on the centralized approach is no reason not to proceed with the decentralized approach as soon as possible.
