---
title: 'Thoughts on the Global Economy"" Remarks by Kenneth W. Dam Deputy U.S. Treasury Secretary Delivered to the World Affairs Council of Washington, D.C.'
date: 2002-01-25
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po948
---

*(Archived Content)*



This administration came to office having advocated a new approach to international financial crises. We sought to reduce the likelihood of crises arising in the first place. We sought to increase investment flows from the developed to the developing world at more affordable interest rates. And we sought to promote a more prudent approach to the use of IMF resources. I would like to focus my comments on this last effort.



Beginning with Mexico in the mid-90s, and especially with the Asian financial crisis later in the 90s, the size of major IMF programs grew enormously in a number of crisis countries. And worries arose that large financing packages might be leading some creditors to act on the assumption that their investments might be protected whenever an emerging market country got into financial trouble.



To want to change a policy is one thing, but in this instance changing it was something else again. Three problems stood in the way. First, large borrowers from the IMF increasingly began to fall behind in carrying through on IMF programs. Second, the threat of contagion to other emerging market countries had to be faced. And third, sovereign debt workouts -- the practical alternative to the policy of extending large scale access to IMF resources when borrowers failed to take the necessary steps to return to payments balance -- might prove hard to achieve.



The first step was the decision to be sure that the IMF itself was taken seriously. The fact is that markets had increasingly begun to look through the IMF to the U.S. Treasury as the decisive decision maker, despite the fact that the U.S. had only one seat on the IMF Executive Board. We believe that the Fund's success is essential to stability in the international economy, and we wanted to make sure that we did not undermine its credibility. That's harder than it sounds when the media repeatedly seeks a U.S. view on each new financial event and when a judicious silence is interpreted as a lack of engagement. So although we talked at one level or another with Fund officials nearly every day, we wanted the Fund to be outfront and successful.



We took the second step when Turkey, having received a large augmentation of its IMF program in December 2000, faced another crisis last Spring. The problem was that Turkey needed to take decisive action on a number of fronts, which was politically difficult for the governing coalition. The solution we found, jointly with the Fund and its other shareholders, was to require Turkey to adopt a number of difficult measures, including nine key prior actions to be precise, before the IMF would agree to a new program, rather than, as too often in the past, merely requiring the borrower to promise to take action in the future under the principle of conditionality. This principle ofprior actionwas not entirely new -- nothing is in international affairs -- but the emphasis was new.



Argentina provided a new challenge to the emerging policy. We decided, again jointly with the Fund and its other shareholders, to go the last mile with Argentina last August. We went along with a new program, but with the twist that some of the Fund money could be used to support a voluntary, market-based debt operation.



But here again a ruling coalition found it difficult to take the necessary measures and within a few months Argentina was in deep trouble. The decision was taken within the Fund process that Argentina's economic situation had become unsustainable. This recognition that the international community should not entertain ever larger scale financing for a country that cannot resolve problems rooted in its policies and structures came to be accepted by markets as well as by governments.



Still, as the President has said, the United States is prepared to help Argentina weather this storm. Once Argentina has committed to a sound and sustainable economic plan, [we] will support assistance for Argentina through international financial institutions.



The Argentine case shows that with sufficient preparation the international community does not have to be faced with contagion whenever a large borrower runs into trouble. Steps were taken by the Fund, through its existing program with Brazil, to give confidence that Argentina's closest neighbor would not fall victim to contagion. And the markets came to see that a workout was inevitable. The result is that today there is little evidence of contagion in the Argentine crisis, particularly not worldwide contagion.



We are thus well along the way to a new paradigm. The international community recognizes that the Fund cannot succeed if borrowers are unable or unwilling to take the domestic steps necessary to live within their means. The world is thus beginning to move back toward the original concept of the Fund as a lender to help countries withstandtemporarypayments imbalances. Contagion seems far less a necessary consequence than in the recent past. And in the case of Turkey, while it cannot be said to have overcome all of its economic challenges, recent economic indicators suggest that the markets at least have regained considerable confidence and Turkey appears to be making progress on some of the difficult measures that it needed to implement to restore its economy to health.



Of course, the new paradigm is not yet fully in place. Until the world economy recovers, emerging market economies face a difficult head-wind. Fortunately, the world economy, like the US economy, appears to be doing better than a few months ago.



And a second challenge lies in creating the structure for successful sovereign workouts. The world has no system such as found where national bankruptcy systems provide a stable environment for a debtor and its creditors to negotiate free from the fear that opportunistic minority creditors may, especially through litigation, make agreement difficult. Under our corporate reorganization law, Chapter 11, the bargaining occurs in the shadow of the court, thereby assuring that the interests of creditors as a group are safeguarded and that a sensible restructuring can be arrived at.



No such international bankruptcy system exists. Anne Krueger, the second-ranking official at the IMF, has made some tentative suggestions. The U.S. Treasury has similarly expressed interest. Various possibilities, some IMF-centered and others based more on contract, are under wide discussion in and out of official circles. We believe that if those discussions can reach a sensible, market-friendly conclusion, both creditors and debtors will be better off. And another step away from the bail-out paradigm will have been taken.

**C. Financial War on Terrorism The world economy is bottoming -- but terrorism is a wild card. We are now seeing many signs that the world economy is bottoming and perhaps reviving. Here in the U.S., consumer confidence has improved. Leading indicators are up - for the third week in a row. And, most importantly, there are signs that the economy can sustain the high rates of productivity growth that it achieved during the last half of the 1990s. But, as Chairman Greenspan has observed, we saw some of these encouraging signs in August and early September. The attacks on the World Trade Center certainly dealt our economy a short-term blow and ended an earlier recovery. Terrorism remains an economic wild-card. No one can predict whether or when another attack may take place, or how bad the next attack might be. The recent incident of the shoe bomber demonstrates that the threat is not yet behind us. Our job, as stewards of our citizens and our economy, is to try to make sure that another attack does not occur or at least does not succeed.  **

**4. New tools in the war on financing. Also important, we have some new tools to fight on the financial front. For example, the USA Patriot Act requires banks to know the true owner of correspondent bank accounts and to terminate suspect correspondent accounts. We will be extending suspicious activity reporting requirements to brokers and security dealers. As of January 1, we have required money service businesses - including hawalas - to register with FinCEN, report suspicious activity, and collect and retain customer identification information - over 8,500 have already done so. And we recently concluded agreements with Interpol and Europol that deepen our ability to exchange information with foreign law enforcement agencies.  **
