---
title: Richard H. Clarida Sworn in as Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Treasury for Economic Policy
date: 2002-02-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po997
---
*(Archived Content)*

Today at 4:30 p.m. Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill will swear-in Richard H. Clarida as Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy. The U.S. Senate confirmed Clarida on January 25, 2002. President George W. Bush nominated Richard Clarida on October 31, 2001.



As Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy, Clarida is the senior advisor to the Treasury Secretary and the Deputy Secretary on all aspects of economic policy. His office is responsible for reporting on current and prospective economic developments and assisting in the determination of appropriate economic policies. His office is also responsible for the review and analysis of both domestic and international economic issues and developments in the financial markets.



Prior to joining the Treasury Department, Clarida was Chairman of the Department of Economics at Columbia University, and has been a Professor at Columbia since 1988. From 1983 to 1988 he served as an assistant professor of economics at Yale University. In 1987, 1988 and 1989, we was a consultant to President Reagan's Council of Economic Advisors, and was a Senior Staff Economist at the CEA from 1986 to 1987. Clarida was a visiting scholar at the International Monetary Fund in 1992 and 1993, and then again from1995 to 1997. He was a visiting scholar at the Federal Reserve Board in 1992, 1994 and 1997.



Clarida earned his Master's and Ph. D in Economics from Harvard in 1983. He earned a B.S. in Economics with Highest Honors from the University of Illinois in 1979.



He is married, has two children and resides in Southport, CT.
