---
title: REMARKS ON THE PATRIOT ACT OF TREASURY UNDER SECRETARY FOR ENFORCEMENT JIMMY GURULÉ BEFORE THE BANKERS ASSOCIATION FOR FINANCE AND TRADE
date: 2002-03-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po1082
---

*(Archived Content)*

Introduction: 

I am sure that many of you here today experienced emotions similar to mine yesterday as the nation took time to reflect on the six month anniversary of the September 11thtragedy. I felt a profound sadness and also anger. I still have a lingering disbelief that what happened that clear day in September actually occurred here on American soil. As I have taken time to reflect on what happened, my resolve has been strengthened to ensure that the Treasury Department is doing everything we can to prevent another large scale attack from occurring on our soil. At the Treasury Department this preventative mindset has translated into taking steps to shut down the flow of funds into the coffers of the terrorists - to make it difficult for them to underwrite their training camps, purchase firearms and explosives, and to send money abroad to fund future attacks. The new PATRIOT Act regulations, when fully implemented, will play a critical part ofrole in this anti -terrorist financing strategy.

**Background and Purpose:**

Let me speak for a moment about the background and purpose of the PATRIOT Act. When President Bush delivered his memorable speech to a joint session of Congress and the nation last September 20ththere was no mistaking the President's words: the United States would combat terrorism with every tool, every tactic at our disposal. Just over a month later the United States Congress backed up the President's words with action when they overwhelmingly passed, and the President signed, what is known today as the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001. Although the Act is an omnibus piece of legislation containing many important provisions, consists of hundreds of pages of text, the true purpose of the legislation is clear - to unite and strengthen America by providing the tools needed to defeat terrorism. The PATRIOT Act is a bipartisan manifestation of the President's promise at the conclusion of that same speech in which he eloquently stated: ...we will meet violence with patient justice, assured of the rightness of our cause and confident of the victories to come.



Today I will address just a portion of the PATRIOT Act, specifically Title III of the overall package which is also known as the International Money Laundering Abatement and Anti-Terrorist Financing Act of 2001 (MLAA for short). Many of the sections of this MLAA will directly affect your industry and it is important that all of us - law enforcement, regulators, as well as the providers of financial services - all understand what this law requires of us.



The concepts in the law were derived from accepted international standards, the deliberations of various congressional committees, and in the archives of legislative reports and proposals that surfaced well before the events of September 11th. The final product, as passed by Congress in October, is one of the most significant anti-money laundering statutes since the original Bank Secrecy Act first became law in 1970.



Let me also add at the outonset of my remarks that I know there is considerable interest from the private sector in the regulations slated to roll out from the Department in the coming months. I appreciate your interest in understanding how the PATRIOT Act will affect your businesses and what you and your companies can do to help. Although I will be discussing some of these new provisions today in general terms, it would be inappropriate to comment extensively on these regulations before the Department completes them. I can assure you, however, that we will continue consulting closely with the private sector and other government agencies will be closely consulted with during the drafting process.

**Overview of Key Provisions:**

Among the many provisions of the MLAA, I would like to highlight some of its key elements.


- I know for many of you this type of explanation raises more questions than it answers. Understandably you are interested in knowing what exactly reasonable procedures means in the real world. As I mentioned earlier in my remarks, the Department of Treasury will continue to consult with private industry as the regulation drafting process continues. The input and expertise of the private sector cannot be underestimated as we continue to harness allassemble available information to make the regulations as effective as possible.**Section 352 - Anti-Money Laundering Programs - While many financial institutions have already instituted their own anti-money laundering programs, section 352 of the MLAA mandates that each financial institution establish a comprehensivebasic anti-money laundering program. Such programs must include: internal policies, procedures and controls; a designated compliance officer; training programs for employees; and, independent audits to test the implementation of the anti-money laundering program. Furthermore, the Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to prescribe, in consultation with the appropriate functional supervisor, additional minimum standards for an anti-money laundering program. The significance of section 352 lies in its broad application to all financial institutions described in the Bank Secrecy Act, many of which have not previously been subject to anti-money laundering regulation.**


I have highlighted what I consider to be some of the more salient provisions, soon to come into force, of the MLAA or Title III of the PATRIOT Act. Certain other provisions of the Act are already effective. As of last December 26th, financial institutions operating in the United States were required to sever correspondent banking relationships with foreign shell banks - those foreign banks that have no known physical presence. As I am certain you all are aware, we are now reviewing public comments received on the proposed rule. We hope to issue a final rule shortly. Similarly, the record-keeping requirements for correspondent accounts maintained by foreign banks also took effect last December. We are also considering the many comments raised in connection with that proposed rule. Also as of last December 26th, financial institutions must be able to respond, within 120 hours, to a request by a banking regulator for records relating to anti-money laundering compliance or to a particular customer's transactions. On the near term horizonFurthermore, final regulations requiring broker-dealers to file suspicious activity reports, or SARS, with Treasury's FinCEN are to be published by July 1st.

**Update on Implementation of the PATRIOT Act:**

Let me also take a moment to comment on the status of the implementation of the Act. Treasury has a hardworking and loyal team committed to this process and I am pleased to inform you that we have received the full support of the Administration in our efforts. In fact, I am joined here today by one of Treasury's key players with respect to the implementation process -- Deputy Assistant Secretary for Money Laundering Julie Myers. We currently have about twenty working groups for the different regulatory projects required by the PATRIOT Act, with the Federal Reserve Board involved in about fifteen of these groups.



As you are probably well aware, the implementation of the PATRIOT Act involves close inter- agency and intra- agency coordination. The Department of the Treasury has reached out both government wide and to the private sector during the drafting process. We have been pleased with the interagency response to getting this job done and in getting it done right.



We are also greatly encouraged by the response of the private sector and industry groups. Regarding several key provisions of the law we not only received positive comments about the legislation, but also helpful insights into implementation issues. I cannot underestimate the important value added to the implementation process when others take time to educate us on their particular industry and its practices and procedures. Any attempt to craft regulations in a vacuum is a foolhardy endeavor and we are particularly thankful for the creative and constructive suggestions from those of you who will be affected by the regulations. These contributions allow us to identify issues early and discover solutions expeditiously.



Before I conclude, let me briefly summarize the key principals that are guiding the Treasury Department's implementation of the Act. First, we want to prevent regulatory arbitrage in that people should not be able to shift from one type of financial institution to another in order to avoid a regulatory scheme or anti-money laundering control. Second, we will prioritize the principles of enhanced coordination and information flow. Third, we will respect important privacy interests. Fourth, we will require only the degree of reporting that results in action by the government - information that is not intended to be used will not be requested. Fifth and finally, we will protect our financial system by using this Act's authority to systematically eliminate known risks as well as to act in response to any specific threat that may arise.



Thank you again for your interest in the work of the Treasury Department. I look forward to continued dialogue and cooperation in the weeks and months ahead.
