---
title: TREASURY UNDER SECRETARY FOR ENFORCEMENT JIMMY GURULE UNIVERSITY OF UTAH SCHOOL OF LAW
date: 2002-05-25
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3138
---
*(Archived Content)*

** Introduction:**

Good afternoon, I am happy to be here with you, my alumni, sharing in your time of accomplishment. I am proud to be in such great company. You have worked hard, stood determined and today you will be rewarded for all that you gave and all that you sacrificed. Today you should stand proud and recognize your achievement.

As most of you know I am also a graduate of the University of Utah School of Law. I have to be honest with you. Just stepping foot on campus today made me feel a little nervous and anxious. My palms started to sweat when I thought about all those final exams and hours of studying. It seems not so long ago, I sat in those same chairs, eager to learn, eager to be a lawyer and carry the title of one of the noblest professions. Being a lawyer brings so many opportunities. As you pursue your career objectives, I hope you consider all your options and realize that the pursuit of financial gain, while necessary for the well being of yourself and your families, should not be your sole focus.

**Role as Treasury Under Secretary for Enforcement:**

Let me talk for a moment about my current position as Under Secretary of Enforcement, for the United States Department of the Treasury. I am responsible for overseeing the enforcement operations of a number of Treasury agencies: the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; the United States Secret Service – which was established in 1865 and holds the distinction of being the oldest federal law enforcement agency in the country; the United States Customs Service which was established in 1789 to collect duties; the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network; the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center; and IRS Criminal Investigations, which as many of you know was the government agency that brought down Al Capone . I must ensure that the men and women of law enforcement are serving the country in the most professional manner. More importantly, I must ensure that the country is protected and kept safe, both from domestic as well as international threats.

The job has taken on new dimensions since the events of September 11th. I was able to visit both Ground Zero and the Pentagon in the days immediately following the attacks. They are experiences that have left an indelible impression on me. The day I visited the site of the World Trade Center it was pouring rain, the air had the feel of death, and the sullenness of the moment was unnerving. Standing immediately across the street from where once stood the majestic Twin Towers now remained six stories of smoldering concrete and gnarled steel beams.

It was there at the site that I saw our dedicated agents, agents who had been working around the clock, combing through the debris, uncovering the remains of the horrific dark side of humanity, yet never forgetting the oath taken nor the honor of the badge. Their undaunting courage and loyalty to the country ever present.

I asked them what they needed. I talked with many of these brave men and women, their dedication and concern apparent. They were giving of themselves so unselfishly, so loyal to serving the citizens of this great nation. Their sacrifices many – time spent away from family and loved ones, the physical and emotional pressures – such sacrifices speak to the true meaning of public service. Clearly, the calling of public service provided the strength for these officers to persevere.

I had a similar experience at the Pentagon. ATF Director Brad Buckles and I met with dedicated ATF agents working at that site two days after the attacks. Parts of the building were still burning and recovery teams were removing bodies as we met with our dedicated Treasury law enforcement team there. Their dedication to this country and to the difficult task at hand left quite an impression.

The challenges when I accepted the job as Treasury Under Secretary for Enforcement were daunting. The challenges we have faced over the last eight months are even more formidable. As Under Secretary, I am intimately involved in the fight against terrorism. The Treasury Department is playing a critical role in this fight. We are blocking the assets of those persons and organizations supporting terror. My employees are involved daily in identifying these fanatical perpetrators and assassins and ensuring that the monetary resources used to fund their malevolent activities are severed. I am pleased to report that our efforts are making a difference. We have blocked the assets of 210 entities and individuals. 166 other countries have joined us in our blocking actions. Worldwide $116 million has been frozen.

As Under Secretary, there is great solace in knowing that you are actively involved in facilitating the apprehension of those that act with such callous disregard for human life. As a lawyer, involvement in the execution of justice and the protection of our country provides me with an inexplicable sense of achievement. Martin Luther King, once wrote, Morality cannot be legislated, but behavior can be regulated. Judicial decrees may not change the heart, but they can restrain the heartless. It is through the dedication, competence, and patriotism of our public servants that we will ensure that those who terrorize U.S. citizens receive their just punishment.

**Importance of Public Service:**

As a public servant myself perhaps I might be a bit bias but I hope you consider the benefits of public service, both tangible and intangible when you are plotting your career path. I cannot convey amply enough the sense of satisfaction that is derived when you lend a hand to your fellow man.

I graduated from law school 22 years ago with a boundless sense of idealism; I was determined to make a difference. As a novice lawyer, I was able to serve as a state prosecutor working on child abuse cases.

One of the cases that I successfully prosecuted involved the sexual abuse of a 7 year-old girl by a next door neighbor. You can’t even begin to imagine the pressure that I felt. I wanted to see this man taken off the streets, to deprive him of his freedom so that he could never again harm another child. I tried the case and won; he was sent to jail.

It was sometime later that I received a card at my office. I was curious to see who had sent it. When I opened it, on the front I saw a picture of a rainbow as well as a self-portrait of the little girl that had been abused by her neighbor. Inside the card she had written, Thank you for helping me smile again. I can't even begin to describe to you how bittersweet that moment was. Her words touched both my heart and soul.

As a lawyer, you possess a unique knowledge and understanding of our legal system and are trained to analyze and dissect complex issues. I challenge you to use that knowledge and those skills to make a difference in someone’s life. Defending that little girl and bringing the assailants of DEA Agent Camarena to justice made me so appreciative of my profession and the skills that my legal education had provided me.

I simply wish for you to know that there is so much good that can be done if educated and brilliant minds such as yours are used for the public good.

I’m not sure how many of you may be acquainted with the President’s Freedom Corps, so I would like to discuss the Corps with you for a moment. It seems that the recent acts of terrorism have reawakened the American spirit of patriotism – service to our country. Americans have looked for and found many opportunities to do good. President Bush created the USA Freedom Corps in an effort to capture those opportunities and foster an American culture of service, citizenship and responsibility. During his State of the Union address, he called upon every American to commit at least two years of their lives – the equivalent of 4,000 hours—to the service of others. Through USA Freedom Corps he wants to help every American answer the call to service by strengthening and expanding service opportunities for them to protect our homeland, to support our communities and to extend American compassion around the world.

I encourage all of you to expand your realm of experiences and explore the challenge of public service. At a time when we see our country, and its landmarks and other symbols of its greatness under attack, the need for well-trained, strong analytical minds like yours is obvious. Our nation needs you. If your interest is in policy development, working with counsel, or other areas, the public service has it all.

I encourage you to provide your services pro-bono from time to time and never lose sight of the true meaning of justice – defined as, the quality of being fair. There is a quote by Thomas Woodrow Wilson that sums up this sentiment quite profoundly. The quote reads, The nature of men and of organized society dictates the maintenance in every field of action the highest and purest standards of justice and right of dealing. By justice the lawyer generally means the prompt, fair, and open application of impartial rules. But we call ours a civilization, and a conception of justice must include sympathy and helpfulness and a willingness to forego self-interest in order to promote welfare, happiness, and contentment of others and to the community as a whole.

**Importance of Integrity:**

As a lawyer it is incumbent upon you to set the example. Morality and ethics govern our legislative and judicial processes and cannot be divorced from the law. As lawyers, you are held to the highest of standards and will be expected to represent the profession in an exemplary way, always reflecting the characteristics of those charged with the ultimate duty, that of carrying out justice. Life can often provide temptation and often great financial gain but you must always caution yourself and use your analytical gifts to guide you in the right direction.

I cannot emphasize to you enough the importance of integrity. After several years of trial work, I have found that when I walk into a courtroom the strongest tool that I bring to the bar is not a well-written brief or my oratory skills. It is my integrity. When you sign your name to a document or represent information in open court you are putting your reputation on the line. That means something. Once that credibility is tarnished in any way it is something that can never truly be replaced.

Another important quality is to always set **high expectations** for yourself in whatever you do. Strive for greatness. On this front, I want to share with you the inspirational words of my grandmother. She always told me to set the bar high and go after what it is that you want to pursue and be relentless in your efforts. She cautioned me to never lose sight of that goal and always strive for excellence. I never forgot my grandmother’s words - they are words that I try to live by. I realized through the years that the bar must always be high, excellence should never be substituted by something less.** Conclusion:**

While the road you have chosen will not always be an easy one and the obligations will sometimes feel overwhelming, you will undoubtedly find that the joys of the profession far outweigh the burdens. The sense of accomplishment at being able to right wrongs is unsurpassed.

A good job and comfortable standard of living should not be the benchmark by which you measure your professional success. Rather, the benchmark should be did I constantly strive for excellence – even ‘greatness’ and did I stay true to my values and beliefs while doing so.

While it goes without saying that all of you will make great lawyers, after all you are graduates of the University of Utah, it is even more apparent that your opportunities are endless. I wish you success in whatever course you take and extend my sincerest congratulations to you as you accept today that honor which you so rightly deserve. Thank you and best of luck!
