---
title: "Statement of Secretary Paul O’Neill after meeting with Economy Minister Lavagna"
date: 2002-08-07T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3335
---

I enjoyed meeting with Economy Minister Lavagna this morning for a detailed discussion of the current economic conditions and challenges in Argentina. And I would like to thank President Duhalde for spending time with me yesterday afternoon to discuss the challenges Argentina faces and plans for overcoming them.

We in the United States have the highest hopes for success and prosperity throughout Latin America, because it is good for all the people of our hemisphere. President Bush envisions a hemisphere linked closely by shared commerce and shared ideas. Just yesterday, the President signed Trade Promotion Authority, enabling him to proceed immediately to expand trade with all the nations of Latin America, increasing our ties and creating opportunities for success for people in all of our nations.

My hopes for the people of Argentina are high. I traveled to Buenos Aires and Patagonia during my years in the private sector, and I know that with the right policies in place, the people of Argentina will succeed. Following my discussions with Minister Lavagna, I am confident that the government of Argentina recognizes the importance of resolving fiscal issues, establishing a clear monetary policy and re-establishing a sound financial sector so that payments can flow normally in the economy and fuel trade and growth.

We welcome Argentina’s continued discussions with the IMF over policy steps necessary to create a sustainable economic environment. We in the United States are glad to work through the international financial institutions to support nations that embrace sustainable, growth-creating economic policies.
