---
title: U.S. International Reserve Position
date: 2002-02-28
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po1054
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the week ending February 22, 2002. As indicated in this table, U.S. reserve assets totaled $67,814 as of the end of that week, compared to $68,081 million as of the end of the prior week.

**(in US millions)**

**I. Official U.S. Reserve Assets**

**February 15, 2002**

**February 22, 2002**

**TOTAL**

**68,081**

**67,814**

**1. Foreign Currency Reserves 1**

Euro

Yen

**TOTAL**

Euro

Yen

**TOTAL**

**a. Securities**

5,393

10,267

15,659

5,414

10,183

15,597

*Of which, issuer headquartered in the U.S.*

  

0

  

0

**b. Total deposits with:**

**b.i. Other central banks and BIS**

9,088

3,960

13,048

9,122

3,928

13,050

**b.ii. Banks headquartered in the U.S.**

  

0

  

0

b.ii. Of which, banks located abroad

  

0

  

0

**b.iii. Banks headquartered outside the U.S.**

  

0

  

0

b.iii. Of which, banks located in the U.S.

  

0

  

0

**2. IMF Reserve Position 2**

  

17,646

  

*17,321*

**3. Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) 2**

  

10,682

  

*10,801*

**4. Gold Stock 3**

  

11,045

  

11,045

**5. Other Reserve Assets**

  

0

  

0

  

**II. Predetermined Short-Term Drains on Foreign Currency Assets**

 

**February 15, 2002**

**February 22, 2002**

1. Foreign currency loans and securities

  

0

  

0

2. Aggregate short and long positions in forwards and

futures in foreign currencies vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar:

*2.a. Short positions*

  

0

  

0

*2.b. Long positions*

  

0

  

0

3. Other

  

0

  

0

                                                                        

**III. Contingent Short-Term Net Drains on Foreign Currency Assets**

 

**February 15, 2002**

**February 22 2001**

1. Contingent liabilities in foreign currency

  

0

  

0

1.a. Collateral guarantees on debt due within 1 year

      

1.b. Other contingent liabilities

      

2. Foreign currency securities with embedded options

  

0

  

0

3. Undrawn, unconditional credit lines

  

0

  

0

*3.a. With other central banks*

      

*3.b. With banks and other financial institutions*

      

*Headquartered in the U.S.*

      

*3.c. With banks and other financial institutions*

      

*Headquartered outside the U.S.*

      

4. Aggregate short and long positions of options in foreign

      

Currencies vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar

  

0

  

0

*4.a. Short positions*

      

4.a.1. Bought puts

      

4.a.2. Written calls

      

*4.b. Long positions*

      

4.b.1. Bought calls

      

4.b.2. Written puts

      

**Notes: **

** **

1/ Includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (SOMA), valued at current market exchange rates. Foreign currency holdings listed as securities reflect marked-to-market values, and deposits reflect carrying values.

2/ The items, "2. IMF Reserve Position" and "3. Special Drawing Rights (SDRs)," are based on data provided by the IMF and are valued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate for the reporting date. The IMF data for January 4 are final. The entries in the table above for January 11 (shown in italics) reflect any necessary adjustments, including revaluation, by the U.S. Treasury to the prior week’s IMF data.

3/ Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce. Values shown are as of January 31, 2002. The December 31, 2001 value was $11,045 million.
