---
title: Statement of Jimmy Gurulé, Under Secretary for Enforcement U.S. Department of the Treasury Before the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
date: 2002-05-08
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3084
---
*(Archived Content)*

Chairman Campbell, Co-chairman Smith, Ranking Member Hoyer, and Members of the Commission, I am privileged to be here today to discuss the Treasury Department's efforts in combating terrorist financing and ways in which the Department can work more closely with this Commission and the Member States of the Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

This is my first appearance before the Helsinki Commission since being confirmed as the Treasury Department's Under Secretary for Enforcement. The Commission has played a crucial role since 1976 in monitoring and encouraging compliance with the Helsinki Final Act and other OSCE documents. Therefore, it is a special honor for me to be here today.

My testimony today will focus on three areas: 1) an overview of Treasury Enforcement; 2) the Treasury Department's counter terrorist financing activities; and 3) the contributions of OSCE Member States in the war against terrorist financing and ways in which the Treasury Department and OSCE can coordinate more closely in this global financial battle.

In conclusion, the OSCE's Bucharest Plan of Action for Combating Terrorism, the Bishkek Declaration, and the upcoming Economic Forum represent three significant steps the OSCE has taken since September 11thto counter terrorism and terrorist financing. The Treasury Department's enhanced cooperation and coordination with the OSCE and its Participating States will result in a force multiplier in this global battle.

I thank the members of the Helsinki Commission for holding this hearing today and for your support of Treasury Enforcement. I look forward to answering any questions you may have.
