---
title: GREG JENNER APPOINTED DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR TAX POLICY
date: 2002-10-21
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/po3563
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy Pam Olson today announced that Greg Jenner has been appointed Deputy Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy. He has been serving as Senior Advisor and Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy since July 8, 2002.



“Greg brings an extensive background in tax policy to the Treasury Department,” stated Pam Olson,  Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy.  “His previous Treasury and Senate Finance Committee experience combined with his tenure in private practice make him an invaluable asset to the Office of Tax Policy.”



Most recently, Jenner served as Partner in the Tax and Legislative Groups at Venable, Baetjer, Howard & Civiletti LLP, where he focused on a wide variety of tax issues. Prior to joining Venable, he was a partner with PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Washington National Tax Services office. He served from 1989 to 1992 as the Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy.  Jenner served as Tax Counsel for the U.S. Senate Committee on Finance from 1985 to 1989, playing a key role in the Finance Committee’s development of legislation that became the Tax Reform Act of 1986.



Jenner was recently named a Fellow of the American College of Tax counsel. He is a member of the District of Columbia Bar and the American Bar Association. He is a member of the Council of the ABA’s Section of Taxation, and chaired the
