---
title: U.S. Treasury Department Announces New Executive Office for Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes
date: 2003-03-03
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js77
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-77

The United States Treasury Department today announced the formation of a new Executive Office for Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes (EOTF/FC) reporting directly to the Deputy Secretary.   This office has been charged with coordinating and leading the Treasury Departments multi-faceted efforts to combat terrorist financing and other financial crimes, both within the United States as well as abroad.

President Bush has reaffirmed that stopping the flow of money to terrorist groups is a top Treasury Department priority, and towards that end I amannouncing today the formation of a new office dedicated to that charge,stated Treasury Secretary John Snow.

The Office will work closely with other offices within the Treasury and throughout the U.S. government to identify, block, and dismantle sources offinancial support for terror and other criminal activities, including money laundering.  In addition, the team will work with international partners to expand the fight against terrorist financing and financial crimes in other nations.  The Office will focus on reducing the risk that the domestic and international financial systems are being misused by criminals and terrorists.

To continue Treasurys leadership on these critical issues, the new Office is charged with the following duties:  developing and implementing U.S. government strategies to combat terrorist financing domestically and internationally (in concert with Treasury's International Affairs Task Force on Terrorist Financing ); developing and implementing the National Money Laundering Strategy, as well as other policies and programs to fight financial crimes; participating in the departments development and implementation of  U.S. government policies and regulations in support of the  PATRIOT Act, including outreach to the private sector; joining in representation of the United States at focused international bodies dedicated to fighting terrorist financing and financial crimes; and developing U.S. government policies relating to financial crimes.

The office will be led by Juan Zarate, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes.  Mr. Zarate will report to the Deputy Secretary of the Treasury.  Until a new Deputy Secretary is named to fill the current vacancy, Mr. Zarate will report to David Aufhauser, Treasury General Counsel, who serves as the Chairman of the NSC policy coordinating committee on terrorist financing.

Within the U.S. Treasury, the new Office will provide policy guidance for the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) bureau as it works with the financial sector, the law enforcement community, and foreign financial intelligence units to foster cooperation against domestic and international financial crimes.  Also, the EOTF/FC will provide policy guidance to the Office of Foreign Asset Control (OFAC).  OFAC administers U.S. trade and economic sanctions, and targets and blocks financial transactions and assets of terrorists, narcotics traffickers and foreign countries that are known to threaten U.S. national security.

FinCEN welcomes the establishment of this important office which will serve as a focal point for the Department of the Treasury's vital role in support of the efforts against terrorist financing, money laundering, and other financial crimes, stated FINCEN Director Jim Sloan.OFAC Director Rick Newcomb added, This step by the Treasury Department should enhance and strengthen the role OFAC has traditionally played in targeting those countries, organizations and individuals that threaten U.S. national security, especially through the targeting of terrorists and the financial network that supports their activities.

This new office will work side by side with the International Affairs Task Force on Terrorist Financing (TFTF), led by Director William C. Murden, which   continues to work with other countries to implement and improve mechanisms for blocking terrorist assets globally, and thereby deny terrorists access to formal and informal financial systems.  The TFTF will continue to track global progress on blocking terrorist assets and coordinate anti-terrorist financing action in international fora such as the IMF and G-7.

The department is also announcing today that until a Deputy Secretary is confirmed, Aufhauser will chair the Treasury Departments existing USA PATRIOT Act Regulation Review Task Force which was established by former Deputy Treasury Secretary Kenneth Dam as part of this departments effort to develop effective regulations which will help us crack down on terrorist financing and money laundering.  The task force reviews the regulations we are drafting and have finalized as a result of the Patriot Act to see if they are unnecessarily burdensome on the financial community - or if they are not muscular enough.   While a Treasury led effort, the task force reaches out to all the experts in this area, both public and private including appropriate federal regulators from the SEC, OTS, OCC, FDIC, CTFC and the FED, as well as industry groups.
