---
title: Maine Receives First Health Coverage Tax Credit Payments
date: 2003-07-03T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js527
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

js-527

 

The Treasury Department announced that qualified health plans inMainereceived the first advance tax credit payments on behalf of eligibleMaineresidents. This is particularly noteworthy because these are the first federal health coverage tax credit payments in the nation.As part ofMaine's Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) pilot program, participating plans received the first payment of nearly $70,000 that will help cover the cost of health insurance premiums for more than 100 families inMaine. Many additionalMainefamilies remain eligible, and they are encouraged to register as soon as possible so that health coverage assistance can begin for them as well.

 

In May, Treasury Secretary John Snow announced thatMainepartnered with the federal government to launch the first advance health coverage tax credit pilot program to help cover the cost of health insurance premiums for manyMaineresidents.

The Trade Adjustment Assistance Act President Bush signed into law last year includes the new Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC). This program provides an advanced payment of 65% of the premium cost for a qualified health plan for individuals who are eligible to receive Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) benefits or certain individuals who receive pension benefit payments from the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC).Approximately 2,800 workers and their families inMaineare estimated to qualify for the program.

TheMainepilot program allows eligible individuals to register immediately for the advance HCTC program, which will otherwise start in August 2003 for the rest of the country.

Maineresidents that are eligible for the pilot program should have received a HCTC notification letter in the mail and an HCTC Program Kit. The Program Kit provides all the necessary information to determine eligibility and the form to register.

The HCTC advance payment program will be available in other states beginning in August 2003. For more information on a particular state and the health insurance programs that qualify, please visit the HCTC website at[http://www.irs.gov](http://www.irs.gov)and enter IRS Keyword: HCTC.

- 30 -
