---
title: Treasury Launches New Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau Today Arthur J. Libertucci Named as Administrator
date: 2003-01-24
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/kd3793
---
*(Archived Content)*

**FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS** KD-3793

The Treasury Department today launched its new Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB) and announced that Arthur J. Libertucci has been named Administrator.

Created by the Homeland Security Bill of 2002, the TTB will be responsible for administering alcohol and tobacco laws and implementing regulations previously administered by Treasurys Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF).  TTB also will administer the federal excise tax for firearms and ammunition. The remaining part of ATF has been transferred to the Department of Justice as the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.

As Administrator, Mr. Libertucci will oversee the approximately 560-person bureau, consisting mainly of ATF employees who are shifting to the TTB. Mr. Libertucci previously served as Assistant Director of the Office of Alcohol and Tobacco at ATF since 1997. He has been with the ATF in other executive capacities since 1970.

As we make this organizational change, our commitment to serving the regulated industries will remain fair and professional and will be one of continued accomplishment,said Mr. Libertucci.

The major functions of TTB include:

Collecting alcohol and tobacco excise taxes and classifying alcohol and tobacco products for excise tax purposes.  TTB collects approximately $15 billion annually.Investigating applications, and issuing permits, for the operation of distilleries, wineries, breweries, and tobacco manufacturers, importers and exporters;Regulating the operations of various industrial users of distilled spirits, including manufacturers of non-beverage products, tax-free, and denatured alcohols;Collecting approximately $100 million in occupational taxes annually;Regulating the production, packaging, bottling, labeling and storage of alcohol and tobacco products;Ensuring that labeling and advertising of alcohol beverages provide adequate information to the consumer concerning the identity and quality of the product;Preventing misleading labeling or advertising of alcohol beverages;Regulating the marketing and promotional practices concerning the sale of alcohol beverages by producers and wholesalers.  This is done primarily through the investigation of allegations of illegal trade practices;Enforcing provisions of the Alcohol Beverage Labeling Act, which mandates that a government warning statement appear on all alcohol beverages for sale and distribution in the United States.

Additional information about TTB can be found at its website,[www.ttb.gov](http://www.ttb.gov/).
