---
title: 'MEDIA ADVISORY: Secretary Snow to Celebrate Hispanic Heritage Month'
date: 2003-10-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js885
---
*(Archived Content)*

On Wednesday, October 8, 2003, Treasury Secretary John Snow will celebrate the contributions of Hispanic Americans at an event in the Treasury Cash Room.  Secretary Snow will also sign a Memorandum of Understanding between the Department and the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities (HACU) that will establish a Treasury Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs) program.

The program is designed to help the Hispanic American community attain educational excellence and to contribute positively to the fulfillment of Treasury's mission.  The partnership will focus on promoting careers and professional attainment among students attending HACU member institutions; increasing employment opportunities in Treasury for HACU faculty, staff, and students attending HACU member institutions; and supporting the development of HACU member institutions.

The event is open to the press.  The Treasury Building is a secure facility; members of the media holding Treasury or White House passes will be admitted.  All others should contact Frances Anderson at 202-622-2960 or at[frances.anderson@do.treas.gov](mailto:frances.anderson@do.treas.gov), provide full name, name of news organization, social security number and date or birth for clearance into the building.  Still and video photographers should arrive at least one hour prior to the start of the event to ensure clearance into the building.

Wednesday, October 8, 2003

Treasury Secretary John SnowHispanic Heritage Month EventHispanic Businesses Leading the Way10:00AMU.S. Department of the TreasuryThe Cash Room1500 Pennsylvania AvenueWashington, DC

** NOTE: Photo opportunity; no Q&A.
