---
title: 'Snow opening statement at today''s press conference'
date: 2003-09-11
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js725
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-725

Today marks two years since our nation suffered the brutal terrorist attacks of September 11.  Like every American, I will never forget the magnitude of this deliberate attack on our country.  On that day, and in its aftermath, we saw the greatness of Americans in the heroism of those who laid down their lives to save others, the compassion of those who helped those they had never met, and in the generosity of millions of Americans who acted with service and kindness.

September 11th will forever be a day of prayer and remembrance.  Across the country, Americans will honor the 11th with memorial services, moments of silence, the ringing of bells, and candlelight vigils.  To remember the events of that terrible morning and how Americans responded in New York City, at the Pentagon, and in the skies over PennsylvaniaPresident Bush proclaimed today Patriot Day.

We will always remember the more than 3,000 innocent people who lost their lives that day, including two members of the Treasury family who showed courage and fortitude on that daySecret Service Master Special Officer Craig Miller and IRS Technical Advisor Dave Bernard.   To remember Miller and Bernard, as well as the other victims of the attack, the Treasury Department observed a moment of silence today at 8:46 am eastern time.

I am proud of the Treasury employees who have taken on new responsibilities since the attacks to lead the effort to disrupt and dismantle terrorist financing.  I issued a report yesterday detailing the Departments efforts undertaken in the war on terror since September 11.  We have enjoyed success in the war on terrorism, but much more remains to be done.   This leads me to the trip I am about to embark on.

On Sunday, I depart for a ten-day tour through Israel, Saudi Arabia, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the United Arab Emirates.Here is a brief overview of the objectives of this trip.In Israel and the West Bank, I will support President Bush's vision for peace by emphasizing steps that Israelis and Palestinians can take to strengthen and improve the lives of their peoples.   I will meet with key Israeli and Palestinian leaders to discuss the economic situation, encourage cooperation for mutual prosperity and urge action in the fight against terrorism.The U.S. remains fully committed to working with Israeli and Palestinian, and Arab partners toward a vision outlined by President Bush of two states living side by side in peace and security.  We still believe strongly that two states living side by side in peace is a hopeful vision for the future of the Middle East.

One of the essential tenets of the Presidents vision is that people need to be responsible for creating the conditions necessary for peace to prevail.  Probably the most -- the most important condition for peace to prevail is for all parties to fight off terror, to dismantle organizations whose intent is to destroy the vision of peace.

In Saudi Arabia, I will advance U.S.-Saudi cooperation in the financial war on terror and Saudi support for the reconstruction of Afghanistan and Iraq, as well as aid to the Palestinian people.  As part of war on terrorism, Saudi Arabia has taken significant steps to prevent the abuse of charities to finance terror.In Afghanistan, I will highlight President Bush's commitment to reconstruction, and will review U.S. efforts to build the Afghani private sector, including its financial systems, trade relations, and business environment.

In Pakistan, I will discuss the need for continued economic reforms and pro-growth policies that will strengthen this key ally in the war on terror.  I will emphasize Pakistan's support for reconstruction in Afghanistan and Iraq, and progress in combating terrorist financing.   While there, I will also tour a newly registered hawala.  Pakistan has been an important partner in the war on terrorist financing and in the effort to regulate hawalas and prevent their abuse by terrorists.

In the final leg of the trip, I will attend the annual meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund in Dubai.

During three days in Dubai, both in group discussions and in bilateral meetings, I will continue to press the themes I have pressed during his previous trips to Europe and Asia to encourage domestic led growth and job creation.

I will stress our view that the best international economic system for the United States, for Asia, for Europe and for the world is one based on the principles of free trade, the free flow of capital, and market-based exchange rates.

I will stress the need for each individual nation to take steps to increase economic growth in our domestic economies.  Raising productivity through structural reform and private investment is the most direct route to raising living standards for our people.  I will repeat what I have said has said time and again that the number one issue facing the global economy is the need for more engines of growth.

During my talks, I will report that as a result of President Bush's leadership, the U.S. economy is returning to higher levels of growth, but that the global economy requires Europe and Asia to attain higher levels of growth as well.In Dubai, our discussions on terrorist financing will follow significant recent progress in this area.  Following the designation of several Hamas related charities and political leaders by the U.S. Treasury last month, the European Union has reached consensus on the designation of the political arm of Hamas as a terrorist organization and the Palestinian Authority and the United Kingdom have taken action to freeze accounts of charities funding Hamas.
