---
title: Treasury Department Names Dan Iannicola, Jr. as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education
date: 2003-09-29
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js770
---
*(Archived Content)*

    

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS



JS-770



The Treasury Department today announced that Dan Iannicola, Jr. has been appointed as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education. Bringing experience in both the education and financial fields, he begins his new post September 29, 2003.



In this position, Mr. Iannicola is responsible for overseeing the Treasurys Office of Financial Education (OFE), which was established in 2002 to promote access to financial education programs so that Americans obtain the practical knowledge and skills that will enable them to make informed financial choices throughout their lives.  Mr. Iannicola will advise the Assistant Secretary of Financial Institutions on matters pertaining to financial education, including the development, implementation and analysis of policy.



Mr. Iannicola was most recently Special Counsel to the Assistant Secretary and Director of Communications in the Department of Educations Office of Postsecondary Education, where he has worked since 2002. During that time, he drafted policy documents, provided legal analysis of statutes and regulations, and represented the Department at public events.



Previously, Mr. Iannicola served as Counsel for The May Department Stores Company and Vice President/Regulatory Liaison for the May National Banks in St. Louis, MO (1996-2002), while also serving as Adjunct Professor of Business Law at St. Louis Community College (2000-2002). He was president of the Affton Board of Education in St. Louis, MO during 1999-2001, following membership on the Board since 1997. Mr. Iannicola also was an attorney with John Deere Credit in Moline, IL (1994-1996).



Mr. Iannicola earned his Bachelor of Science degree in Economics from The Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, and his Juris Doctor from theUniversityof Illinois College of Law. He resides in Arlington, Virginia.
