---
title: U.S. Designates Three Individuals And One Organization Involved In Terrorism In Algeria
date: 2003-10-24T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js944
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

js-944

WASHINGTON -- The U.S. Treasury Department today announced the designation of three individuals and an organization for involvement in terrorism.  Todays action comes in response to the recent submission by another country of these names to be listed as terrorists by the United Nations. 
 
The individuals, Mokhtar Belmokhtar, Mustapha Nasir Ait El Hadi, and Djamel Lounici, are designated for their involvement in the Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC). GSPC, previously designated as a terrorist organization, continues to conduct operations aimed at government and military targets in Algeria and has ties to Al-Qaida.  The Al-Bakoun ala al-Ahd organization is also named for providing support to GSPC.
 
Todays action is taken under obligations to freeze the assets of individuals and organizations listed by the UN and is consistent with the Financial Action Task Forces Special Recommendation III on Terrorist Financing.  These names were originally submitted to the UN by another country for listing as Al-Qaida related terrorists.  A UN listing requires all Member States to freeze the assets of those listed and to bar cross-border travel.  Although the UN listing is still pending, the U.S. has determined that these four meet the standards for designation.
 
With todays action, the U.S. and our international partners have designated 327 individuals and organizations as terrorists and terrorist supporters and have frozen over $136.8 million in terrorist assets.
