---
title: '"Letter from Deputy Secretary Dam to President Bush"'
date: 2003-02-04
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js12
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-12



President George W. BushThe White HouseWashington, D.C.  20500



Dear Mr. President:



I am writing to submit my resignation as Deputy Secretary of the Treasury to be effective on a date consistent with an orderly transition.



It has been a great privilege to serve in your Administration and at the Treasury.  I consider it a special opportunity to support the goals and policies you have set forth so clearly and wisely for the country.  And I have found it inspiring to be able to work with the great leaders you have attracted to government service in your Administration in bringing about results I so deeply believe in.



In my period at the Treasury I have worked hard on the financial aspects of the war on terrorism.  Among other issues on which I have endeavored to provide new and innovative approaches are international taxation and international trade—and especially international financial services negotiations.  I have also been the principal person in the Treasury working on national security and foreign policy within the framework of the National Security Council.



As Deputy Secretary I have, of course, spent much of my time on management issues, especially those involving the Internal Revenue Service and the bureaus and offices concerned with terrorist finance and money laundering.



Mr. President, I thank you for the opportunity to serve my country under your leadership.



Sincerely,



Kenneth W. Dam
