---
title: Treasury Under Secretary Jimmy Gurul to Resign
date: 2003-01-29T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/kd3812
---
*(Archived Content)*

**FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS** KD-3812

United States Treasury Under Secretary for Enforcement Jimmy Gurultoday announced his decision to resign from the Treasury Department.  Mr. Gurulwill teach law at the University of Notre Dame law school, as well as explore additional interests in the private sector.  His resignation will become effective on February 10, 2003.

In his letter to President Bush, Mr. Gurulwrote: I am extremely grateful for the opportunity to serve your administration, the Department of the Treasury, and the American people during the difficult and challenging times following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.

At Treasury, Mr. Gurulwas a key leader in the implementation of President Bushs financial war on terrorism, working to find, disrupt and dismantle terrorist financial networks around the world.  Under Mr. Gurules leadership, the Treasury Office of Enforcement designated 257 global terrorists groups and individuals, and blocked over $125 million in terrorist funds, pursuant to Presidential Executive Order 13224.  Treasury also implemented the financial regulatory provisions of the U.S.A. PATRIOT Act, preventing terrorists from transferring money through banks and other financial institutions.

Jimmy Gurulis one of the most distinguished law enforcement officials and law professors in the country.   His talents and leadership proved invaluable for the Treasury Department and the United States government as he helped shape and lead our campaign against terrorism.   Its been a great privilege to work with him and this Administration is grateful for the contributions he has made to the nation.  We wish him the best for what I am certain will be a fruitful future,Acting Treasury Secretary Kenneth Dam said.

The Treasury Under Secretary for Enforcement provides oversight, policy guidance, and support to the Treasury law enforcement components, including the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; the U.S. Customs Service; the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center; the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network; the U.S. Secret Service; the Executive Office for Asset Forfeiture; and the Office of Foreign Assets Control.  The Under Secretary also provides enforcement policy guidance to the Internal Revenue Service's Criminal Investigation Division.

Mr. Gurules letter concludes: While I leave my position at the Treasury Department with a sense of accomplishment and pride, I realize that much work remains in the war against terrorism.  However, I am confident that you, Mr. President, will continue to provide our nation with outstanding leadership to prevail during these perilous timesIt has been a distinct honor and privilege to serve you.
