---
title: White House Announcement of Intent to Nominate Two Individuals (Schwab,Leet) to Serve in the Administration
date: 2003-07-09
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js544
---
*(Archived Content)*

    

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-544



THE WHITE HOUSE



Office of the Press Secretary  ________________________________________________________________________FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASEJuly 9, 2003



President George W. Bush today announced his intention to nominate one individual to serve in his administration:



The President intends to nominate Susan C. Schwab of Maryland, to be Deputy Secretary of the Treasury.  Dr. Schwab is currently Dean of the University of Maryland School of Public Affairs.  Until 1995, she was Director of Corporate Business Development at Motorola, Inc., in Schaumburg, Illinois.  Dr. Schwab was appointed by President George H.W. Bush in 1989 to serve as Assistant Secretary of Commerce and Director General of the U.S. & Foreign Commercial Service of the U.S. Department of Commerce.  Before joining the Commerce Department, Dr. Schwab worked for Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri from 1981 until 1989.  While working for Senator Danforth, Dr. Schwab served as legislative director, chief economist, and legislative assistant for international trade.  Dr. Schwab worked at the American Embassy of Tokyo as a trade policy officer from 1979 until 1981. From 1977 until 1979, she served as a trade negotiator at the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.



Dr. Schwab received her Bachelor's degree from Williams College and a Master's degree in Development Policy from Stanford University.  She earned her Ph.D. at George Washington University School of Business and Public Management.

  

THE WHITE HOUSE



Office of the Press Secretary________________________________________________________________________FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASEJuly 9, 2003



President George W. Bush today announced his intention to nominate oneindividual to serve in his administration:



The President intends to nominate Kenneth Leet of Massachusetts, to be Under Secretary of the Treasury for Domestic Finance.  Mr. Leet currently serves as Managing Director of the Investment Banking Division at the Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. Prior to becoming Managing Director of the Investment Banking Division, Mr. Leet served as the firm's Managing Director of the Mergers & Acquisitions Department.  Mr. Leet has also served as the Vice President of the Leveraged Finance / Principal Investing and as Associate in the Mergers & Acquisitions Department.  Earlier in his career, Mr. Leet worked as a Principal at Odyssey Partners and as a lending officer at Manufacturers Hanover Trust.



Mr. Leet earned his Bachelor's degree from Brown University and his M.B.A from Harvard Graduate School of Business.



Mr. Leet serves on the Board of Directors of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. He is also founder of the Immunotherapy Research Fund and a trustee of the Rudolph Rupert Foundation, a small cancer research trust.  In addition, Mr. Leet is on the Board of Directors and a Trustee of The Old Vic, a London-based theatre company.
