---
title: Treasury Secretary Snow Praises Assistant Secretary Pam Olson for Leadership and Accomplishments While Serving in Bush Administration
date: 2003-12-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1051
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-1051


Treasury Secretary John W. Snow today praised the leadership and accomplishments of Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy Pamela F. Olson during her service to the Bush Administration. Ms. Olson joined Treasury as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy in February 2001 and was sworn in as Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy September 26, 2002. Today she submitted her resignation to the President, effective after the budget is completed.



“Pam has shown outstanding leadership within Treasury and the Administration on a wide variety of issues over the past several years,” said Secretary Snow. “Her expertise has been invaluable as we have worked to promote policies that have resulted in economic growth and job creation. Millions of families have benefited from her efforts in ensuring that the President’s Jobs and Growth Tax Relief was enacted.



“Pam’s effort to continually improve and streamline federal tax policies and practices has greatly benefited the taxpayer and her significant contributions to the government are to be commended. Her passion, experience and insight will be missed, and I wish her the best in her future endeavors. She is a rare public servant and she simply cannot be praised too highly for her dedication and service to the President and the country.”



Ms. Olson’s major accomplishments during her tenure as Assistant Secretary include her efforts to enact policies that reduce taxes, increase economic growth and boost job creation; simplify the tax code so that it is fair, easy to understand, easy for taxpayers to comply with and easy for the IRS to administer; cracking down on abusive tax avoidance transactions; improving the guidance process; and improving the revenue estimating process.



**Related Documents:**


- [The Text of Olson’s Resignation Letter to the President](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/resignation.letter)
