---
title: Wolfe Named Deputy Financial Coordinator for Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance (ORHA) in Iraq
date: 2003-04-25
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/20034251292419811
---
*(Archived Content)*

WASHINGTON, DC - U.S. Treasury Secretary John Snow today announced that Treasury Deputy General Counsel George Wolfe will serve as Deputy Financial Coordinator for the Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance (ORHA) in Iraq.  In this role, Wolfe will serve as Deputy to ORHA Financial Coordinator Peter McPherson, also named today.   
In his capacity as Deputy Financial Coordinator, Wolfe will work closely with the Financial Coordinator and Iraqis to assist in rebuilding the finance ministry, the central bank and the banking system.    
Wolfe has served as Treasury Department Deputy General Counsel since 2001.   Prior to joining Treasury, Wolfe was a partner in Nelson, Mullins, Riley, and Scarborough, a 300 attorney law firm headquartered in Columbia, South Carolina (1984 - 2001).   He has also previously served on the Investment Policy Advisory Committee (INPAC), which advises the United States Trade Representative on foreign investment issues.   In the 1990s, he worked with his native State of South Carolina to develop economic development policies and legislation. 
Wolfe is a native of Columbia, South Carolina and graduated from Washington and Lee University cum laude in 1973.   He received his J.D. cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania in 1977.   He is married and has one son.
