---
title: White House Announces Mark W. Everson Tapped to Serve as New IRS Commissioner
date: 2003-01-13T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/kd3759
---
*(Archived Content)*

**FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS** KD-3759

Today the Bush Administration announced that Mark W. Everson has been nominated to serve as the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service.

Mark Everson is the right candidate with the perfect combination of public and private experience and a vision to lead the IRS, stated Acting Treasury Secretary Kenneth W. Dam. The time taken to find such a candidate has been time well spent.

Most recently, Everson served as Deputy Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Presidents chief management officer, with responsibility for establishing management policies for all executive agencies in the areas of finance, human capital, procurement, and information technology.  His office oversees the federal government's information and technology agendas, and coordinates all IT spending within the government, including the IRS.  Prior to that, he was Controller of the Office of Federal Financial Management.Prior to joining the Bush Administration in August 2001, Mr. Everson served as Group Vice President - Finance of SC International Services, Inc., a $2.2 billion privately owned, Dallas based, food services company. For ten years, from 1988 until 1998, Mr. Everson was an executive with the Pechiney Group, the worlds fourth largest producer and converter of aluminum. While with Pechiney, he held financial and operating positions in Chicago, Illinois; Manisa, Turkey; Marion, Indiana; and Paris, France.

Mr. Everson served in the Reagan Administration from 1982 until 1988. For three years, he was at the U.S. Information Agency, the public diplomacy arm of the government. In 1985, he moved to the Department of Justice where he served as a Special Assistant to the Attorney General. He was subsequently Executive Associate Commissioner and then Deputy Commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service. While at INS, he oversaw implementation of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. Mr. Everson began his career with Arthur Andersen & Co. in New York. He received his B.A. in History from Yale University and has a Masters of Science in Accounting from the New York University Business School. He is 48 years old and is married to the former Nanette Rutka. They live in Arlington, Virginia and have two children, Leonard and Emma.

The Internal Revenue Service is the nation's tax collection agency and administers the Internal Revenue Code. Its mission: to provide America's taxpayers with top quality service by helping them understand and meet their tax responsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity and fairness to all.
