---
title: Treasury Names Robert Carroll As Deputy Assistant Secretary For Tax Analysis
date: 2003-11-28T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1028
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-1028

The Treasury Department today announced that Robert Carroll has been appointed as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Tax Analysis. He will provide economic advice and analysis for the Office of Tax Policy with regard to all aspects of the economics of Federal taxation. He will be responsible for the development, analysis and implementation of tax policies and programs. He replaces Andrew Lyon and begins his new post on December 1.

Dr. Carroll was most recently a Visiting Scholar in the Tax Analysis Division of the Congressional Budget Office, where he provided analyses of investment incentives, tax reform, income dynamics, and the distributional effects of taxes.

From July 2002 to June 2003 he served as a Senior Economist (Public Finance) with the President’s Council of Economic Advisers. He was responsible for providing economic analysis and briefings on a variety of public finance issues, including the President’s Jobs & Growth Act, tax reform, tax simplification, international taxation, and retirement security.

Prior to the CEA, he was a Financial Economist with the Treasury Department’s Office of Tax Analysis, Revenue Estimating Division from 1996 to 2002, a position he also held from 1990 to 1995. He was responsible for preparing economic analyses of Administration and Congressional proposals. He worked for Ernst & Young, LLP, from 1995 to 1996, as Manager, Policy and Regulatory Economics.

He holds a Ph.D. and a Masters in Economics from Syracuse University and a B.S. in Economics from State University of New York. He resides in Arlington, Virginia.

-30-
