---
title: U.S. Designates Individual Tied to Attacks on European Tourists
date: 2003-12-06
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1043
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-1043


WASHINGTON -- The U.S. Treasury Department today announced the designation of an individual for involvement in terrorism.  Today’s action comes in response to the designation of this individual as a terrorist by the United Nations.The individual, Saifi Ammari was the leader of a region for the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat (“GSPC”), an organization previously designated by the United States as a specially designated global terrorist, and designated by the United Nations, because of its ties to al-Qaida.  Earlier this year, Ammari’s group orchestrated the kidnapping of thirty-two tourists while they were traveling in four-by-four vehicles, on motor bikes, and in camper vans in an area between Illizi, Djanet, and Tanjanrasset, Algeria.  The kidnappings occurred over a period of several weeks.  Sixteen Germans, ten Austrians, four Swiss, one Dutch, and one Swede were held hostage by the group.  In May 2003, the Algerian army managed to free 17 tourists from the kidnappers.  The kidnappers escaped.  In June, one of the remaining hostages died as a result of the extreme conditions.  After negotiations, the remaining hostages were released on August 18, 2003.  The hostages identified Ammari as the Emir of the group.The German public prosecutor’s office issued a warrant for the arrest of Ammari on September 11, 2003.  The charges are based on Ammari’s responsibility for masterminding, as the operational leader, the kidnapping of the hostages and his role as leader of a GSPC region.  The GSPC has been on the list of the UN’s al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions Committee since October 6, 2001.Today’s action is taken under obligations to freeze the assets of individuals and organizations listed by the UN.   The name was originally submitted to the UN by another country for listing.  A UN listing requires all Member States to freeze the assets of those listed and to bar cross-border travel.   The UN listed this individual on Thursday, December 4th.With today’s action, the U.S. and our international partners have designated 344 individuals and organizations as terrorists and terrorist supporters and have frozen over $136.8 million in terrorist assets.
