---
title: tg1658
date: 2003-06-22T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js509
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-509

Thank you very much. It is a pleasure to be in Israel and an honor to speak before such a distinguished group from the business community.

The United States has enjoyed a close economic relationship with Israel since the first days of Israeli statehood.  Following the establishment of the U.S.-Israel Free Trade Agreement in 1985 this relationship has become even closer. The United States is now the largest export market for Israel. America invests more in Israel than does any other country.

**Recent Trends in Historical Perspective ** Like many economies in the world, the Israeli economy suffered substantial setbacks in the past 2years. After reaching a peak in the third quarter of 2000, real GDP fell in 2001 and in 2002 by about 1 percent per year.  As in my home in Northern California, Israel's high tech industry was hard-hit by the slowdown in the IT sector. After rising by 23 percent in 2000, exports fell by 7 percent in 2001. The domestic security situation has also significantly harmed Israels growth.  Over the longer term, I believe structural policy problems have also been holding back economic growth in Israel.  Except for the 1999-2000 export boom, economic growth declined steadily in the second half of the 1990s.   This was in contrast to the stronger growth in the first half of the 1990s.

Israel has a history of success in overcoming economic crisis. In the 1980s, economic growth also slowed down.  Israel was plagued by triple-digit inflation and large budget deficits.  But the introduction of fiscal and monetary policy changes addressed these problems.  The budget deficit was reduced.  Money growth was brought under control.  Structural reforms were implemented, especially trade liberalization and more competition, as in mobile phones.

These policies laid the groundwork for the favorable economic performance in the early 1990s.  Growth rose to an average of over 6 percent.  Inflation came down sharply.  However, as reforms lagged, growth slowed again in the second half of the 1990s.

Today Israel faces another turning point, and again, with the right measures, Israel is destined for success. The government has embarked on an important reorientation of economic policy.  It is interesting that Germany, France, and Japan are also starting to address long-term structural impediments to growth.  As the global economy recovers, I believe these structural policy changes will have significant payoffs.

** The Importance of Productivity Growth ** I have long argued that economic policy should focus on increasing productivity growth because that is the driving force behind rising living standards in any country. Simply put, productivity is a function of the pace at which capital is accumulated and the efficiency of resource allocation. While Israels strong investment in human capital has led to one of the worlds most highly skilled workforces, private capital accumulation has been crowded out by excessive government spending.  Resource allocation has also been distorted by inefficiencies in the highly-concentrated financial sector, generous social transfers and high taxes that led to low labor market participation rates.

Finance Minister Netanyahus economic recovery program, passed by the Knesset three weeks ago, is crucial for achieving higher productivity growth in the Israeli economy.  Under this plan the government will undertake fiscal policies and structural reforms in order to reduce government expenditures and keep the budget deficit on a downward path.

Israels general government revenues and expenditures stand at roughly 42  percent and 48 percent of GDP respectively, compared to an OECD average of 38 percent and 41 percent of GDP in 2001.  Finance Minister Netanyahus economic recovery plan therefore rightly focuses its efforts on reducing spending growth.  The recent efforts to trim Israeli government ministry budgets and limit the growth of social transfers are important first steps in implementing this plan. These efforts will reduce the governments claim on real and financial resources.

In addition, the reduction in marginal tax rates will help encourage the Israeli private sector to make productivity-enhancing investments.  Under this plan, the top marginal tax rate will fall from 60 percent to 49 percent.  This will increase the incentives to work and spur growth.

As President Bush has said, Government spends a lot of money, but it doesn't build factories, it doesn't invest in companies, or do the work that makes the economy go.The role of government is not to manage or control the economy... but to remove obstacles standing in the way for faster economic growth.

In Israel, getting government out of the direct provision of commercial goods and services is a critical part of the government's plan.  Last week's successful offering of El Al shares on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange is very significant.  This will pave the way for further privatizations. I look forward to successful offerings of Bank Leumi, Israel Discount Bank and Bezeq Ltd.  Boosting the privatization program will strengthen Israeli competitiveness in the global marketplace and will create generous returns to the Israeli people.

I also agree with Finance Minister Netanyahu that wider financial sector reform should be a top priority for the government. A more efficient banking sector is essential to ensuring that resources are allocated to their most productive use. As the economy begins to pick up, the inefficiencies associated with Israels highly-concentrated banking sector could eventually present a roadblock to restoring high growth.  Recent reforms to make the pension system more market-oriented by shifting pension investments away from preferred government bonds and into the regular bond and equity markets will also help to create a deeper, more liquid capital market.

Labor market reforms would also help boost productivity by increasing labor market participation. At only 54 percent, labor market participation in Israel is among the lowest in the industrialized world.

These are all bold steps in the direction of restoring robust economic growth in Israel, a goal that the U.S. strongly supports.  The people of the United States are providing $9 billion in loan guarantees to help the Israeli economy weather regional shocks and thereby create the conditions for the Israel government to put in place reforms that will lead to higher and sustainable growth.  In negotiating the agreement, both sides agreed that the guarantees should be linked to progress in implementing the economic reform plan.

In conclusion, let me mention that I am visiting Israel at the end of a trip to Kuwait, Iraq, Afghanistan and Jordan. Freed of the threat of Saddam Hussein and the Taliban, we now have an historic opportunity for sustained economic, political and social progress. The U.S. is committed to doing its part to seize this opportunity. Success in the long-term project of reconstructing Iraq will serve as a powerful example in the region. Moreover, progress in implementing the roadmap will promote greater economic cooperation between Israel and its neighbors, with substantial benefits for all parties. With a successful recovery plan and increasing regional integration, Israel can serve as both an economic engine and an example for the region. Prosperity can in turn reinforce peace and security.

Thank you.
