---
title: Treasurer Rosario Marin Travels to Nevada to Promote President Bush’s Economic Agenda
date: 2003-03-22T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js123
---
*(Archived Content)*

U.S. Treasurer Rosario Marin will travel to Las Vegas, Nevada, Tuesday, March 24th to promote President Bush’s economic agenda.

During this trip, the Treasurer will participate in two open press events.

In Las Vegas, the Treasurer will meet and speak with Hispanic business members of the National Federation of Independent Business and the Latina Chamber of Commerce of Las Vegas to hear about local economic conditions and to discuss President George W. Bush's efforts to strengthen the economic recovery.  This stop is part of the Treasurer’s objective to meet with people on the front lines of the American economy - small business owners, employees, individual investors, and business leaders - to discuss the state of our economy, the impact of the policies we have put in place, and the steps we are taking as we move forward.  The Treasurer will discuss the President’s jobs and growth plan in her remarks.

Also in Las Vegas, the Treasurer will meet with the Women’s Chamber of Commerce of Nevada to discuss key components of President Bush’s jobs and growth plan.  The Treasurer hopes to have a candid discussion with the business leaders in Nevada and discuss the President’s jobs and growth plan.

Tuesday March, 24, 2003

Las Vegas, Nevada

9:15 AM    LATINA CHAMBER OF COMMERCE of LAS VEGAS and the NFIB BREAKFASTOPEN PRESSJW Marriott Las Vegas Resort, Spa and Golf221 N. Rampart BoulevardLas Vegas, NV 89145Las Vegas, Nevada

12:00 PM    LUNCHEON AND ROUNDTABLE DISCUSSION WITH THE WOMEN’S CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF NEVADA.OPEN PRESSThe Hampton Inn421 Astaire Dr.Henderson, NV 89014THE PRESIDENT’S GROWTH PACKAGE WILL

PROVIDE BENEFITS TO 690,000 NEVADA TAXPAYERS

REDUCING TAXES

 More than 690,000 taxpayers in Nevada will have lower income tax bills in 2003 under the President’s growth package.

 More than 165,000 business taxpayers can use their tax savings to invest in new equipment, hire additional workers, and increase pay.

ACCELERATE 10-PERCENT BRACKET EXPANSION

 More than 535,000 married couples and single filers will benefit from the acceleration to 2003 of the expansion of the 10-percent bracket scheduled for 2008.

ACCELERATE REDUCTION IN INCOME TAX RATES

 Nearly 200,000 taxpayers in Nevada will benefit from the acceleration to 2003 of the reductions in income tax rates in excess of 15-percent scheduled for 2004 and 2006.

ACCELERATE REDUCTION IN MARRIAGE PENALTY

 More than 245,000 married couples in Nevada will benefit from the acceleration to 2003 of provisions that increase the standard deduction for joint filers to double the amount for single filers and increase the width of the 15-percent bracket to twice the width for single filers.  These two provisions were scheduled to phase in between 2005 and 2009.

ACCELERATE INCREASE IN CHILD TAX CREDIT

 More than 190,000 married couples and single parents in Nevada will benefit from the acceleration to 2003 of the increase in the child tax credit from $600 to $1,000 that was scheduled to phase in between 2005 and 2010.

EXCLUSION FOR CORPORATE DIVIDENDS

 More than 235,000 taxpayers in Nevada will benefit from the exclusion of dividends paid from previously-taxed corporate income.

SOURCE:  Counts are for the number of returns filed in 2001 that would have benefited from the package.  These estimates are based on tabulations from all individual income tax returns processed by the Internal Revenue Service in 2001.  Most of these returns covered tax year 2000.
