---
title: Minnesota Launches Federal Health Coverage Tax Credit
date: 2003-07-29T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js613
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-613

On Wednesday, July 30th, Minnesota will launch the on-site registration for the federal Health Coverage Tax Credit Program (HCTC) that will help cover the cost of health insurance premiums for many Minnesota residents.

The on-site registration will be held on Wednesday, July 30th from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. at the National Guard Armory (600 Cedar Street) in St. Paul. Eligible Minnesota residents should have received their HCTC program kit in the mail which includes detailed information about eligibility and a registration form. They are encourage to attend the on-site registration.

I am pleased that the interested parties in Minnesota have worked so hard to make the Health Coverage Tax Credit program available to more than 3,000 workers and their families,stated Treasury Secretary John Snow. I commend them for their leadership in this unique partnership between state and federal governments, labor and participating health plans. This program is a real innovation in tax policy, one that we hope will lead the way for other innovations that help real people obtain the health care coverage that they need in a flexible and reliable way. We want to ensure that those who qualify for the credit get the help they need as quickly as possible. Its a bold step in the direction of affordable health care for all Americans.

The HCTC program requires that individuals eligible for TAA assistance or PBGC be enrolled in a qualified health plan. The qualified health plan for Minnesota is Minnesota Comprehensive Health Association, administered by Blue Cross Blue Shield of Minnesota.

In addition to the HCTC program, Minnesota received a National Emergency Grant for more than $7 million that will help provide temporary health coverage for an estimated 2,000 eligible Minnesota recipients.

The HCTC advance payments program begins nationally in August 2003. The Trade Adjustment Assistance Act President Bush signed into law last year included the new Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC). This program provides an advanced payment of 65% of the premium cost for a qualified health plan for individuals who are eligible to receive Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) benefits or certain individuals who receive pension benefit payments from the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC).

For more information on a particular state and the health insurance programs that qualify, please visit the HCTC website at[www.irs.gov](http://www.irs.gov/)and enter IRS Keyword: **HCTC**.

-30-
