---
title: U.S. International Reserve Position
date: 2003-10-07T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js765
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the latest week. As indicated in this table, U.S. reserve assets totaled $83,074 million as of the end of that week, compared to $82,068 million as of the end of the prior week.

**I. Official  U.S.  Reserve Assets***(in US millions)*

**TOTAL September 19, 2003 September 26, 2003 82,068 83,074**

1. Foreign Currency Reserves1

** Euro Yen TOTAL Euro Yen TOTAL**

a. Securities

7,549

13,798

21,347

7,656

14,069

21,724

*Of which, issuer headquartered in the U.S.*

  

0

  

0

b. Total deposits with:

*b.i**. Other central banks and BIS*

12,329

2,771

15,100

12,481

2,826

15,307

*b.ii**. Banks headquartered in the U.S.*

  

0

  

0

b.ii. Of which, banks located abroad

  

0

  

0

*b.iii**. Banks headquartered outside the U.S.*

  

0

  

0

b.iii. Of which, banks located in the U.S.

  

0

  

0

2. IMF Reserve Position2

  

22,869

  

23,148

3. Special Drawing Rights (SDRs)2

  

11,709

  

11,851

4. Gold Stock3

  

11,043

  

11,043

5. Other Reserve Assets

  

0

  

0

 

**II. Predetermined Short-Term Drains on Foreign Currency Assets September 19, 2003 September 26, 2003 Euro Yen TOTAL Euro Yen TOTAL**

1. Foreign currency loans and securities

  

0

  

0

2. Aggregate short and long positions in forwards and futures in foreign currencies vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar:

*2.a. Short positions*

  

0

  

0

*2.b. Long positions*

  

0

  

0

3. Other

  

0

  

0

 

**III. Contingent Short-Term Net Drains on Foreign Currency Assets September 19, 2003 September 26, 2003 Euro Yen TOTAL Euro Yen TOTAL**

1. Contingent liabilities in foreign currency

  

0

  

0

1.a. Collateral guarantees on debt due within 1 year

      

1.b. Other contingent liabilities

      

2. Foreign currency securities with embedded options

  

0

  

0

3.Undrawn, unconditional credit lines

  

0

  

0

*3.a. With other central banks*

      

*3.b. With banks and other financial institutions*

      

*Headquartered in the **U.S.*

      

*3.c. With banks and other financial institutions*

      

*Headquartered outside the **U.S.*

      

4. Aggregate short and long positions of options in foreign

      

Currencies vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar

  

0

  

0

*4.a. Short positions*

      

4.a.1. Bought puts

      

4.a.2. Written calls

      

*4.b. Long positions*

      

4.b.1. Bought calls

      

4.b.2. Written puts

       

**Notes:**

1/ Includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (SOMA), valued at current market exchange rates. Foreign currency holdings listed as securities reflect marked-to-market values, and deposits reflect carrying values.Foreign Currency Reserves for the latest week may be subject to revision.Foreign Currency Reserves for the prior week are final.

2/ The items, "2. IMF Reserve Position" and "3. Special Drawing Rights (SDRs)," are based on data provided by the IMF and are valued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate for the reporting date. The entries for the latest week reflect any necessary adjustments, including revaluation, by the U.S. Treasury to the prior week’s IMF data.IMF data for the latest week may be subject to revision.IMF data for the prior week are final.

3/ Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce.
