---
title: U.S. TREASURY SECRETARY JOHN W. SNOW Remarks
date: 2003-10-22
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js925
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-925

**To Commercial Club of Chicago Chicago, Illinois** There is growing sense today that after a series of shocks - includingterrorist attacks, corporate scandals, and a recession - the Americaneconomy is accelerating again.

Last month the economy exceeded expectations and added new jobs. Inflation is low. After-tax incomes are rising. Home ownership is at record highs. Productivity is high. Factory orders, particularly for high-tech equipment, have risen over the last several months.  Both auto and non-auto consumer spending are strong.  The stock market is up 30 percent since March.  In the past few months, shipments of capital goods excluding defense and aircraft have increased at the fastest pace since early 2000.  Industrial production is on the rise.  Housing starts have remained outstanding.  Small business optimism recently reached a record high level, according to the National Federation of Independent Business, and confidence among large-company CEOs reached its highest level in eleven years according to the Conference Board. Corporate earnings are showing a nice upturn with many exceeding expectations.  Most importantly, improved business optimism has begun to translate into hiring and employment has started to rise.

Monday's budget numbers reinforce these indications of economic recovery.  As the economy grows, government revenues will increase, which will help keep the deficit under control.  Going forward, it is essential that we keep our focus on maintaining these favorable conditions.  Smart policies will lead to job creation and economic growth, while keeping tight control over federal spending.

Im not pointing out these facts to claim any victories.  To the contrary,too many people are still out of work, and employment - along with after tax disposable income - is the most important economic indicator in the lives ofmost American families.  Real disposable income continues to rise.  Thatsvery important.  And if we achieve the high levels of growth thatforecasters are expecting, businesses will create new jobs at a faster paceto meet demand, and employment will increase.  That is critical, because wecannot be satisfied so long as we have fellow citizens looking for work.

President Bushs administration has worked steadily to turn a long slowdown into a pickup, and now were seeing the results.

The Presidents policies have increased disposable income and kept theeconomy on its feet.  He also worked with Congress to direct the SEC toclean up corporate fraud, increase corporate accountability, and restoreconfidence in the markets.  Now his Jobs and Growth Plan is entering fullforce.  Child tax credits have arrived across America.  A greater share ofour paychecks is going home, and less is going to Washington.  New expensing rules are creating greater incentives for business investment especially small business investment.  Reduced taxes on capital in the form of dividends and capital gains are inspiring more aggressive investments.

The fact is, the Presidents policies have been creating jobs.  We estimatethat without the economic growth measures proposed by President Bush, in the second quarter in 2003 the unemployment rate would have been nearly 1 percent higher.  As many as 1.5 million fewer Americans would be working, and real GDP would have been as much as 2 percent lower.

Nonetheless, thats small comfort for workers who are out there looking.  We have no intention of sitting back, waiting to see if the economy turns outas predicted.  We are continuing to act to strengthen this economy andcreate jobs.

A few weeks ago, the President unveiled a six-point plan for ensuring theeconomic success we all want to see: namely, that every American who wants to work can find a job.  Our Commerce Secretary, Don Evans, has been acting on the Presidents commitment to address the challenges facing U.S. manufacturing, in particular.

Under the Presidents plan, we will take the following steps to create theconditions in which employers will hire more workers:

First, we are working to make health care more affordable and its costs more predictable, so employers can add new workers without also adding a large and uncertain burden from health care costs.  We need to create anenvironment where health care spending is focused on providing high quality, high value care.

Second, we are working to prevent frivolous lawsuits from diverting moneyfrom job creation into legal battles.  We also intend to ensure that whennecessary lawsuits proceed, the settlements are paid to the victims, not thetrial lawyers.

Third, we are working to build a more affordable, reliable energy systemthat can support the expansion of our economy.

Fourth, we are streamlining regulations and needless paperwork requirements that reduce business productivity and deter growth.

Fifth, we are opening new markets to high value American products andbringing down prices for American consumers through trade agreements.

And sixth, we are working to make tax relief permanent, so businesses andfamilies alike can plan for the future with confidence.

Let me now turn for a moment to the state of the global economy.

With the dramatic expansion of trade in recent decades, the world economy is more connected than ever before.  For the United States, this means that our success in creating jobs and economic growth depends in no small measure on other economies.  When other economies are growing and expanding, their demand for the things we produce is greater.  By the same token, as the United States grows, we generate more domestic income and buy more from the rest of the world.  Successfully managing our economy is as important to the rest of the world as their success is to us.

As we look at the global economy today it is hard to escape the conclusionthat it is growing far too slowly particularly in the largest industrialnations.  Growth in Europe has been lagging.  Japan has experienced aprolonged period of flat or negative growth.  The U.S. is just emerging froma period of sub-par growth.

This weak performance in the large industrial economies has far-reachingconsequences for the rest of the world especially developing countries.The developing countries depend on the industrial world to generate growth. Indeed, the best assistance we can provide is strong markets for their exports.

These issues were squarely covered at the meeting of the Group of Sevenfinance ministers and central bank governors in Dubai.  For the first time,the G7 set an agenda highlighting the need for growth, and each nationcommitted to increase growth at home.  This acknowledgement, in my view, was a milestone.

While we share the need for growth, the impediments to growth vary between economies.  Much work remains to be done, but Im encouraged by the sense of urgency among the G7 nations to achieve our goal.

Within our economies, as we solve shorter-term demand-side problems and the global recovery proceeds, we are discovering longer-term supply-sidebarriers to productivity growth and employment.  Our key objective in the G7 is on the supply-side, targeting structural policies that increaseflexibility and raise productivity and employment.

In addition to measures already underway, my G7 colleagues agreed to pursue additional pro-growth policies by addressing structural problems in their own economies.  For example, labor market and pension reform in Germany; public sector and health care reform in France; and pension reform in Italy. Japan will promote banking reform.  Britain will take measures to improve skills and labor force productivity; Canada will implement a five-year tax reduction plan.  The European Union needs to revitalize investment, especially investment in infrastructure and research and development.

The United States cannot be the sole engine of world growth.  Asymmetricgrowth rates among the major economies are unsustainable over the long term. The best way to allow for balanced growth is for the large industrialeconomies to implement flexible policies that clear away structural barriersto growth.

President Bush is leading by example, with an ambitious agenda formaximizing growth and job creation in the United States.  Were ready totake this economy through the recovery stage, and move to a new level ofexpansion, prosperity and success.

Thank you.
