---
title: Treasury Announces Market Financing Estimates
date: 2003-07-28
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js580
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free AdobeAcrobatReader. *

JS-580

The Treasury Department announced today that it expects to borrow $104 billion in marketable debt during the July September 2003 quarter and to target a cash balance of $45 billion on September 30.  In the last quarterly announcement on April 28, 2003, Treasury announced that it expected to borrow $76 billion in marketable debt and to target an end-of-quarter cash balance of $45 billion on September 30.  This increase is due to somewhat lower receipts and higher outlays.  Higher marketable borrowing will be partially offset by a reduction in compensating balances following the introduction of Depositary Compensation Securities (announced on July 3, 2003) and higher non-marketable borrowing through higher net issues of State and Local Series securities.

Treasury also announced that it expects to borrow $126 billion in marketable debt during the October December 2003 quarter and to target a cash balance of $45 billion on December 31.

During the April June 2003 quarter, Treasury borrowed $60 billion in marketable debt and ended with a cash balance of $30 billion on June 30.  On April 28, Treasury announced that it expected to borrow $79 billion in marketable debt and to target an end-of-quarter cash balance of $45 billion.  The lower end-of-quarter cash balance reflects reduced borrowing from Treasurys earlier projection.

Additional financing details relating to Treasurys Quarterly Refunding will be released at 9:00 A.M. on Wednesday, July 30.

**Related Documents:**

- [August 2003 Charts](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/august2003charts.pdf)
