---
title: Remarks before the Brazil-U.S. Business Council John B. Taylor United States Treasury Washington, D.C. January 27, 2003
date: 2003-01-27T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/kd3800
---
*(Archived Content)*

**FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS ** KD-3800

Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak before this distinguished group of business leaders.  Today I would like to talk about economic policy in Brazil and in the United States, and also about opportunities for cooperation between Brazil and the United States.

The recent electoral victory of Luz Incio Lula da Silva provides a valuable opportunity for a promising new chapter in historically strong relations between our two countries.  In this new era, Brazil and the United States face many common economic challenges, from strengthening economic growth to combating the financing of terrorism.  It is now more important than ever for the United States and Brazil to continue to strengthen our cooperation.

We are encouraged by the economic leadership that President Lula and his new economic team have already shown.  We have seen an agenda designed to fight poverty and increase economic growth and stability.  The new economic plan is rightly ambitious in its specific aims to end hunger, combat corruption, and discourage drug trafficking.  And it is responsible in its emphasis on economic reform in the four key areas: fiscal policy, monetary policy, trade policy, and structural policy.  There are clearly many reasons to be hopeful about Brazil.

We in the United States government are not alone in our optimism about Brazil.  A recent poll indicated that 76 percent of Brazilians believe the current government will be goodor excellent.  The financial markets have also rallied with interest rate spreads falling 10 percentage points in four months.  The positive market reaction we have seen stems from key steps Lula has takenappointing a responsible focused economic team and clarifying a coherent set of economic priorities.  And implementation of the key economic reforms is already proceeding.

In recent years, President Cardoso and his economic team made major progress by consolidating fiscal policy, eliminating hyperinflation, and strengthening the financial sector.  Finance Minister Antonio Palocci has signaled an interest in traveling further down this road as well as tackling the next stage of pro-growth economic reforms. As stated in Minister Paloccis inauguration speech, We will seek reforms that are necessary for a sound and sustainable resumption of growth...The seriousness and responsibility in managing the public issues is an undeniable inheritance of the conduct of economic policy by Minister Pedro Malan and his team...And we will be glad to preserve this heritage and afterwards pass it on even more consolidated.

I have argued that economic policy should focus on increasing productivity growth because productivity growth is the source of rising living standards and reduction in poverty in any country.  The two determinants of productivity growth are the pace at which capital is accumulated and the effectiveness with which labor and capital are employed.  According to research at the Inter-American Development Bank, both determinants are constrained in Brazil.  Indeed, this is why productivity growth, while improving, is still less much lower in Brazil than it can be.  One cannot easily invest in capital when real lending rates to businesses are 15 percent. And one cannot easily create high productivity jobs when tax rates are high.

The importance that the new government of Brazil places on fiscal policy reform is therefore most welcome.  Again to quote Minister Palocci: Today we have a government that spends a lot and spends badly...We can no longer live with a budgetary management that promises more than public revenues allow.

There is a commitment to generate the primary surplus that is necessary to undoubtedly guarantee the sustainability of our public debt.  This will reduce the risk premium and thereby lower interest rates and be a boon to private investment and economic growth. And, over time, a lower debt burden will lessen the dependence on some of the highest tax rates in Latin America.  And we see that elements of this policy are already being implemented with new spending proposals being offset with reductions in spending elsewhere in the budget.

Indeed one of the main purposes of the planned social security reform is to achieve a reduction in the annual deficit stemming from pension payments.   Another pillar of the new administrations fiscal policy agenda is tax reform.  Converting cascading tax rates into a value-added tax lowers the fiscal burden on producers and improves Brazils investment climate. This can attract needed capital for improving productivity.

Regarding monetary policy, the new government has committed itself to maintaining a monetary policy with a floating exchange rate, an inflation target, and clear rules and autonomyfor the central bank to change the instruments of monetary policy to achieve these targets.  In particular, the new government has announced its plans to submit to the Brazilian congress a Monetary Responsibility Law, which would grant autonomy to the central bank.  Evidence from many countries shows that the trinity of a flexible exchange rate, a low inflation goal, and a transparent procedure for setting the interest rate instrument will lead to greater macroeconomic stability and it is important that Brazil has chosen this route.  The recent actions by the Brazilian central bank show that the policy is already being implemented.

On the structural front, the new economic team has noted the importance of expanding the private credit market so as to give small businesses more access to credit.  Reform of the bankruptcy code is an important step because, by improving creditor rights, it will help increase lending and reduce interest rates.  The pledge to reduce corruption, which raises the costs of economic transactions and is itself a barrier to strong economic growth, is also an important structural reform.

Regarding international trade policy, it is encouraging that President Lula cited the goal of opening the economy through trade liberalization in his inauguration address.  Lowering barriers to international trade is an important way to raise productivity growth.  The benefits from greater trade include improved access to needed capital imports and technology to raise productivity and improve living standards.

This agenda is a model in its aggressive focus on pursuing pro-growth reforms in several areas of economic policy.  It is an agenda that resounds positively in the United States.  It mirrors many of President Bushs own initiatives from lowering tax rates to expanding international trade.

Soon after coming into office President Bush was successful in implementing a timely reduction in taxes that helped mitigate the economic recession.  And last year he successfully won back Trade Promotion Authority, the first time since 1994 that a president has had this essential legislative tool to negotiate trade agreements.  And his recently announced program of tax cuts has the goal of raising economic growth, sustaining the recovery, and creating more jobs both in the short run and the long run.  Small businesses are our main source of new jobs.  The cut in the income tax rates will lower the tax on many small businesses and more generous expensing provisions for small businesses would encourage them to invest in the technology and other equipment they need to expand and create jobs.  Similarly, the elimination of the double tax on dividends will lower the cost of capital, encourage investment and job creation, and raise productivity.  The expansion of the child tax credit and the extension of the 10 percent income tax to more taxpayers are examples of how the tax cuts apply to all income tax payers.

We are confident that this tax program will raise economic growth and improve economic stability in the United States.  And because the United States is such a large part of the world economy, raising economic growth here will raise economic growth elsewhere, including Brazil.  Indeed, pursuing a pro-growth economic policy at home is a key principle of our international economic policy.

Another principle of our international economic policy is to support countries that are following good economic policies.  The United States has supported Brazil consistently in the International Monetary Fund with the program in August of 2001 and its augmentation in August of 2002.  We would like to encourage the multilateral development banks to provide assistance, perhaps for the zero hunger plan, or for small business lending, or for trade capacity building. We are also anxious to work with Brazil to create a solid Free Trade Agreement for the Americas.

We look forward to advancing many of these initiatives as part of the broader Summit our Presidents agreed to at their meeting in December.  We at the United States Treasury plan further concrete and constructive discussions with our counterparts in the Brazilian Ministry of Finance to pursue areas of mutual interest.

Translating economic agendas into reality takes enormous skill in communication and consensus building, whether in Brazil or the United States.  As we have seen in our own country, implementing economic policy is just as important as designing it.  The Lula administration will have to form the important coalitions necessary for key legislative reform.  Of course, the atmosphere of cooperation and outreach that dominated President Lulas inauguration speech can provide comfort in this regard

In conclusion, let me emphasize that Brazil is a critical part of Latin America, a region that holds particular significance to President Bush.  Brazil is the worlds fifth most populous country and the ninth largest economy.  It has long been a major trade, investment, and financial partner of many countries in our hemisphere including the United States.

Our efforts to increase economic growth in this hemisphere also include the recently concluded free trade agreement with Chile, the just-opened negotiations for a Central American Free Trade Agreement, more assistance to the poorest countries through the Millennium Challenge Account, the new grants program at the World Bank, increased private sector lending through the multilateral development banks, and facilitating remittances from the United States to families in the countries of Latin America.

Higher economic growth throughout this hemisphere is our shared priority.
