---
title: Treasury Department Names Gregory Zerzan as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions Policy
date: 2003-03-03
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js79
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-79

The Treasury Department today announced that Gregory P. J. Zerzan has been appointed as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions Policy. He begins his new post March 3, 2003.

In this position, Mr. Zerzan is responsible for legislative and policy matters related to the financial services sector including commercial banks, investment banks, insurance companies, credit unions and savings and loans. He manages Treasury policy regarding Government Sponsored Enterprises and the agencies that regulate and insure these entities. He also oversees the Treasurys Terrorism Risk Insurance Program.

Mr. Zerzan was most recently the Senior Counsel for Legislation for the House Financial Services Committee, where he worked since 2000 on legislation that included financial services modernization, commodity futures modernization and corporate accountability.  He had worked on the former House Banking Committee and was part of the staff that implemented the transfer of securities and insurance jurisdiction to the newly formed Financial Services Committee.

Previously, Mr. Zerzan served as Counsel and Chief Counsel for the House Agriculture Committee from 1997 until 2000. He worked from 1996 to 1997 as an Associate at the Portland, OR, law firm of Kell, Alterman & Runstein, LLP.

Mr. Zerzan earned an undergraduate degree in Political Science at Willamette University in 1993 and a law degree at Willamette University College of Law in 1996.
