---
title: Statement by John Snow, U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum Finance Ministers Phuket, Thailand
date: 2003-09-05
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js702
---
*(Archived Content)*

    

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS



JS-702



In my first meeting with the finance ministers of the Asia-Pacific EconomicCooperation Forum I come away impressed with the serious interest expressed by my colleagues on the important issues we came to discuss.  I thank our hosts from Thailand for their hospitality and for providing this beautiful setting for our meetings.



Both in group discussions and in bilateral meetings, I took the opportunityto address issues important to our prosperity and our security.  I stressedour view that the best international economic system for the UnitedStates, for the Asia-Pacific region, and for the world is one based on theprinciples of free trade, the free flow of capital, and market-basedexchange rates.  I also stressed the need for each of us to take steps toincrease economic growth in our domestic economies.  Raising productivitythrough structural reform and private investment is the most direct route toraising living standards for our people.  I reported that the U.S. economyis returning to higher levels of growth, but that the global economyrequires Europe and Asia and Japan in particular to attain higher levelsof growth as well.



Throughout my meetings we had extensive discussions on the issue ofcurrencies.  I expressed my long-held view that market-determined floatingcurrencies, with interventions kept to a minimum, are essential to awell-functioning international financial system.  Only freely floatingcurrencies bring the accuracy and efficiency necessary for proper pricing,account settlement and capital flows among our economies.  Furthermore,rigid currency systems, rather than promoting stability, instead increasethe risk that economies cannot properly adjust, thereby escalating theimpact of economic shocks.  The management of currencies at unnatural rates distorts markets, tending toward beggar-thy-neighbor policies, andencourages protectionism.  These are paths we must avoid.



I was pleased with the reception of this view from my colleagues.  Ouragreement that flexible exchange rates are necessary to promote orderly andbalanced external adjustments is significant.  This principle is anessential first step toward the universal acceptance of market-based, freelyfloating currencies.  We should move quickly to build upon this initialfoundation of agreement.



The free flow of capital is also a fundamental component of our globalsystem of international trade and finance.  Barriers raise the cost andlimit the freedom of investment capital to seek out the best opportunities.We should continue to eliminate restraints on investment capital in order tomaximize our growth opportunities.



Trade among our nations has risen significantly in recent years, and this isto the benefit of all our economies, but I emphasized that we must continueto press for further trade liberalization in the Doha Round WTOnegotiations.  Our prosperity is enhanced when all nations have the freedomto bring to global, competitive markets the best goods and services theirtalents and abilities can produce, in compliance with the laws ofinternational trade.



We also discussed our collective actions to halt the flow of funds to theagents of terror.  I announced that the United States is designating 10members of Jemaah Islamiyah, or JI, as terrorists, freezing any assets inthe United States and prohibiting transactions with these individuals.  Wewill also be submitting these names to the United Nations for action by allUN member states.  I am encouraging my colleagues to take bold actionagainst this terrorist organization and I look forward to working with ourallies in the region to shut down JIs sources of financing and support, andto eliminate the threat they pose to the people of Southeast Asia.



We have had a successful series of meeting this week.  We have broken new ground on important issues concerning our economic relations.  I lookforward to continue to work with my counterparts in the region as we work to put in place the building blocks of strong, sustainable economic growth.
