---
title: U.S. Treasury to Hold First U.S.-Brazil Group for Growth Meeting
date: 2003-08-26
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js676
---
*(Archived Content)*

On Wednesday, August 27, 2003, U.S. Treasury officials and officials of the Brazilian Finance Ministry will hold the first session of the U.S.-Brazil Group for Growth.



The U.S. delegation will be chaired by John B. Taylor, Under Secretary for International Affairs at the Department of Treasury.  U.S. participants will include Federal Reserve Governor Ben Bernanke and Council of Economic Advisors member-designate Kristin Forbes.  The Brazilian delegation will be co-chaired by Joaquim V. Levy, Secretary of the National Treasury, and Marcos Lisboa, Secretary for Economic Policy, both at the Ministry of Finance.  Brazilian participants will also include Brazilian Ambassador to the United States Rubens Barbosa and Brazilian Executive Director to the IMF Murillo Portugal.  The Group for Growth was initiated by President Bush and President Lula of Brazil in June.



Brazil and U.S. delegations will hold discussions on the determinants of growth and measures to boost small- and medium-sized enterprises, including access to credit and capital markets.  The meeting will also offer a venue for each side to present an overview on recent growth performance and discuss recent trends and prospects in the fiscal area.  Both the United States and Brazil are putting in place policies to raise growth, with voting on key reform legislation in Brazil and the implementation of major jobs and growth legislation in the United States.  Closer understanding of the underpinnings of economic activity and reforms in each country is thus of mutual interest and would benefit the hemisphere.



A photo opportunity will be held at the conclusion of the meetings and a press briefing with U.S. and Brazil officials will follow.



U.S.-Brazil Group for GrowthUnder Secretary John Taylor, U.S. TreasuryJoaquim V. Levy, Brazil Secretary of the National TreasuryMarcos Lisboa, Brazil Secretary for Economic Policy9:00-1:45 PMU.S. Department of the Treasury, Room 41211500 Pennsylvania Ave NWWashington, DC



*** 1:30PM– Photo Opportunity – Office of U/S John Taylor (Room 3432)* 1:45PM - Press Availability - Media Room (Room 4121)**
