---
title: TREASURY DEPARTMENT NAMES ROY RAMTHUN AS SENIOR ADVISOR TO THE SECRETARY FOR HEALTH INITIATIVES
date: 2003-11-17
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1006
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-1006


Today, Roy J. Ramthun joins the Treasury Department as Senior Advisor to the Secretary for Health Initiatives.



In this position, Mr. Ramthun is responsible for advising the Secretary and senior Administration officials regarding the Administration’s health initiatives. Ramthun will coordinate Treasury’s activities in support of the Administration’s health objectives, including those directed at health care costs and access to affordable health insurance, including proposals in the President’s budget for health care tax credits, as well as continued implementation of the Health Coverage Tax Credit enacted under the Trade Act of 2000 (HCTC), and other related matters.



Mr. Ramthun succeeds Mr. Ruben King-Shaw, who previously held this position at Treasury.



Mr. Ramthun mostly recently worked for Humana, Inc. in Louisville, KY, from 1999 to 2003. At Humana, Inc., one of the nation's largest publicly traded health benefits companies, Mr. Ramthun served in a variety of senior capacities, most recently in the internal Consulting Practice. He served from 1996 to 1999 as Director, Federal Affairs for Humana, Inc. in Washington, DC.



From 1990 to 1995, he served as a Professional Staff Member on the U.S. Senate Finance Committee, where he developed and wrote legislation for Medicaid, long-term care insurance, health care reform, and maternal and child health. Prior to joining the Senate Finance Committee, he worked as a Legislative Analyst at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Care Financing Administration, Office of Legislation and Policy, Division of Medicaid Legislation.



Mr. Ramthun earned his Bachelor of Science degree in Biochemistry from the University of Michigan, and his Master of Science in Public Health from the University of North Carolina.
