---
title: Treasury Secretary John Snow Travels to Florida to Promote President Bush’s Economic Agenda
date: 2003-04-02T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js151
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary John Snow will travel to Orlando, Fort Lauderdale and Naples, Florida on Thursday and Friday, April 3-4, to discuss President George W. Bush’s efforts to strengthen the economy and to promote President’s Jobs and Growth plan.

 

The Secretary will meet with members of the hospitality and tourist industry, local economic officials, small business owners, individual investors, business leaders, and members of the financial services industry to highlight the importance of swiftly enacting the President’s Jobs and Growth plan, which will create and secure jobs, accelerate and sustain our economic recovery, and increase workers' standards of living.  More than 5 million taxpayers in Florida will have lower income tax bills in 2003 under the President’s growth package.

 

During meetings with senior citizens, the Secretary will pay special attention to discussing the elimination of the double taxation of dividends – a key component of President Bush’s Jobs and Growth plan.  More than half of all taxable dividends go to America’s seniors and one point seven million taxpayers in Florida will benefit from the exclusion of dividends paid from previously-taxed corporate income.

 

The Secretary will discuss how elderly taxpayers will benefit from the provision that would allow them to exclude 100 percent of dividends from taxable income.   Economists estimate that 9.8 million senior households receive dividend income that is currently taxable.  Seniors rely on these checks for a steady source of income in their retirement.   Yet, their income is taxed twice – once at the corporate level and then again on their own return.  The President’s Jobs and Growth Package would increase seniors’ rates of return on investments by eliminating the double taxation of dividend income.

 

Administration estimates show that the dividend exclusion would provide tax relief for 7 million elderly taxpayers by an average of $1,252.

**Open Press Events  AMENDED Thursday, April 3, 2003  12:00 pm** Remarks to the Orlando Chamber of CommerceOrlando Regional Chamber of CommerceChamber Boardroom75 South Ivanhoe BoulevardOrlando, Florida **2:00 pm** Roundtable Discussion with SeniorsMark Street Senior Recreational ComplexThe Oak RoomEast Mark StreetOrlando, Florida 32803 **Friday, April 4, 2003 9:30 am** Roundtable Discussion With SeniorsBeach Community Center3351 Northeast 33rd AvenueFort Lauderdale, Florida 33308 **12:00 pm** Remarks to Ft. Lauderdale Chamber of CommerceRiverside Hotel620 East Las Olas BlvdFt. Lauderdale, Florida 33301
