---
title: Secretary John Snow, Statement Regarding Senate Passage of the Medicare Prescription Drug Bill
date: 2003-11-25
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1023
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-1023


Today's Senate passage of bipartisan Medicare Prescription Drug legislation is an important victory for the health of America's senior citizens.  This Administration is very pleased with the work of the House and Senate, and we are looking forward to speeding the final bill to the President's desk for his signature.  I applaud the good work by Secretary Thompson and the President's leadership that helped get us to this historic point.



As Managing Trustee of the Medicare Trust Fund, let me point out that this bill received the support of Democrats, Republicans, and the AARP - the largest seniors’ organization in this country - -because it is good for 40 million seniors and disabled persons on Medicare.  The plan will help seniors pay for prescription drugs, and it gives the greatest benefits to those who most need help.  That assistance will help ensure economic security for seniors, many living on fixed incomes.



These benefits will give every American senior citizen the same kinds of health care choices enjoyed by member of Congress and most working Americans.  Seniors who are happy with their current coverage need not make any change.  It also greatly expands the former Medical Savings Accounts into new and innovative Health Care Savings Accounts, which will be a welcome option for many Americans.  In addition, this plan includes reforms that will ensure the future of the Medicare system, so it is available to Americans in the decades ahead.  Congress and the President have taken historic action to deliver prescription drug benefits to all American seniors, and should be commended for their efforts.
