---
title: Statement of Arnie Havens Before the Senate Committee on Finance
date: 2003-11-18
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1009
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-1009

Mr. Chairman, Senator Baucus, and Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today, and especially for your prompt scheduling of this hearing.   I am honored to be President Bush’s nominee to serve as General Counsel for the Department of the Treasury, and I am grateful to Secretary Snow for his confidence in me.  If you will permit me, I will take a moment to introduce the members of my family that are here today.As you may know, I grew up inEvanston,Illinois.  My parents were passionate about a number of things, but chief among them was assuring that my sister and I received a quality education, and they sacrificed much to give us that opportunity.  They also taught us by example the importance of giving back to our community in recognition of the obligation we have as citizens living in a democracy.  Volunteering and assuming positions of responsibility in community organizations, albeit at times challenging, was simply a given in our family.  These important lessons and others help to explain why - for me - public service is both a privilege and an obligation.  The opportunity to return to public service at this time seems especially important in this post 9/11 environment.  Today, our Nation faces challenges that we must and can meet so that our children’s and their children’s freedoms and futures remain bright.  I welcome the opportunity, if confirmed, to contribute what I can toward meeting these challenges.Mr. Chairman, I believe that the solid education my parents encouraged and helped me achieve along with the professional experiences that followed have prepared me well for the responsibilities I will undertake as General Counsel, if I am confirmed by the Senate.  My legal training has prepared me throughout my career to solve complex problems by identifying issues, assessing relevant statutory and regulatory provisions, and crafting solutions to meet the goals of my clients.My government service as an Assistant Legislative Counsel for the House of Representatives and the Minority Counsel and Staff Director of the House Energy and Commerce Committee taught me to be precise, analytical and thorough in developing legal proposals, and gave me a detailed understanding of the legislative and regulatory processes.In the private sector, I have provided strategic advice to my clients, and have advocated their interests in a variety of forums.  This has helped me to formulate clear and cogent legal and policy arguments, and to present them in a persuasive and effective manner.I understand the responsibilities of the position to which I have been nominated are great.  The legal issues facing the Treasury Department today are among the most important and sweeping in government, ranging from the financial war on terrorism to interpretation of the tax code.  Decisions of the Department directly impact individual citizens and businesses in very profound and personal ways.  It is clear to me that assuming leadership of the Treasury’s legal division and providing candid advice to the Secretary and other Treasury clients will be both challenging and immensely rewarding.  If confirmed, I welcome this challenge, and pledge to you that I will work hard every day to carry out my responsibilities.I thank you again, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to appear before you today, and I am happy to answer any questions that you and other members of the Committee may have.
