---
title: McPherson Named Financial Coordinator for Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance (ORHA) in Iraq
date: 2003-04-25
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/20034251128419242
---
*(Archived Content)*

WASHINGTON, D.C. - U.S. Treasury Secretary John Snow today announced that Peter McPherson will serve as Financial Coordinator for the Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance (ORHA) in Iraq.  In this role, McPherson will serve as the principal financial and economic policy advisor to Director of ORHA, Jay Garner.  
“Peter McPherson brings a wealth of experience in the public and private sector, including the presidency of a major university, to this new position,” stated Treasury Secretary John Snow. 
In his capacity as Financial Coordinator, McPherson will work closely with Iraqis to assist in rebuilding the finance ministry, the central bank and the banking system.  McPherson will be working for the Director of ORHA and will receive support from the Department of the Treasury.   
McPherson has served as the President of Michigan State University since 1993.   Prior to accepting the post at Michigan State, he held a variety of senior positions at Bank of America, beginning in 1989, as Group Executive Vice President working in international banking, global debt restructuring, and investment management. 
McPherson’s service in the U.S. Federal Government includes Deputy Secretary of the Treasury (August 1987 - March 1989); Administrator, U.S. Agency for International Development (February 1981 - August 1987); Chairman of the Board, Overseas Private Investment Corporation (February 1981 - August 1987); and Special Assistant to President Ford (March 1975 - January 1977). 
He has also served as managing partner in the Washington office of the law firm of Vorys, Seymour and Pease (January 1977 - November 1980); has served on the boards of several corporations and educational organizations; and has worked in Peru as a Peace Corps volunteer (1964 - 1965). 
McPherson received a B.A. in Political Science from MichiganStateUniversity (1963), an M.B.A. from Western Michigan University (1967), and a J.D. from American University Law School (1969).   McPherson is married to Joanne McPherson.  They have four grown children.
