---
title: '"Letter from Gurule to President Bush"'
date: 2003-01-29T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/kd3811
---
*(Archived Content)*

**FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS**KD-3811

Dear President Bush,

After thoughtful and deliberate consideration, Julia and I have decided to return to our home in Niles, Michigan, where I will rejoin the law faculty at Notre Dame Law School, as well as pursue some opportunities in the private sector.  I therefore will be resigning my position as Under Secretary for the Treasury Departments Office of Enforcement effective February 10, 2003.

I am extremely grateful for the opportunity to serve your Administration, the Department of the Treasury, and the American people during the difficult and challenging times following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.

Responding to your strong leadership, I have worked as Under Secretary (Enforcement) to redirect and coordinate the Treasury Departments extensive financial investigatory resources and expertise to starve the terrorists of funds.  To that end, the Office of Enforcement, in close coordination with other federal agencies and the international community, has developed an effective campaign to identify, disrupt and dismantle terrorist financial networks around the world.  As part of this campaign, the Office of Enforcement has played a prominent role in implementing Presidential Executive Order 13224, executed under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA), which has resulted in the designation of 257 Specially Designated Global Terrorists, and the freezing of over $125 million in terrorist-related funds.  Furthermore, my office has worked tirelessly to implement the financial regulatory provisions of the U.S.A. PATRIOT Act, necessary to prevent terrorists from transferring money through banks and other financial institutions.

While I leave my position at the Treasury Department with a sense of accomplishment and pride, I realize that much work remains in the war against terrorism.  However, I am confident that you, Mr. President, will continue to provide our nation with outstanding leadership to prevail during these perilous times.

Once again, thank you for the enormous opportunity to serve our country.  It has been a distinct honor and privilege to serve you.

Sincerely,

Jimmy GurulUnder Secretary (Enforcement)
