---
title: Treasury Announces Appointment of Deputy Assistant Secretary of Public Affairs
date: 2003-09-08T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js708
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-708

The U.S. Treasury Department is pleased to announce today the appointment of Mr. Salvatore TonyFratto to the position of Deputy Assistant Secretary of Public Affairs.  In his new position, Mr. Fratto will be responsible for media relations for the Department of the Treasury, including planning strategies on how to present issues to the media; representing senior Treasury officials to the media; providing tactical communications counsel; acting as a Treasury spokesman; and representing the Bush Administration's views on issues to the press, and through them, to the general public.

Since March 2001, Mr. Fratto has served in the Treasury Office of Public Affairs, first as a public affairs specialist and more recently as the Director of the office.  In these positions, he has held primary responsibility for the Departments communications regarding international finance and development issues, as well as overseen the day to day activities and budget of the office.

Prior to his experience at the Treasury Department, Mr. Fratto has served in a variety of communication and government positions, such as communications specialist for the Bush-Cheney 2000 campaign, Vice President of Government Affairs for the Pittsburgh Regional Alliance, Director of Community and Economic Affairs for Pennsylvania Governor Tom Ridge, and Communications Director for Senator Rick Santorum (R-PA).

Mr. Fratto earned his bachelors degree in economics from the University of Pittsburgh, and attended the University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public and International Affairs.
