---
title: Treasury Department Names William Fox as Director of The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
date: 2003-11-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js998
---
*(Archived Content)*

    

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-998



Secretary of the Treasury John W. Snow today announced the appointment of William J. Fox to be Director of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network.  Mr. Fox is currently the Acting Deputy General Counsel and Associate Deputy General Counsel where he has served as the principal assistant to the General Counsel on terrorist financing and money laundering issues.



Mr. Foxs demonstrated skill as an attorney and manager, his extensive experience in financial enforcement issues, and his great working relationship with the law enforcement, intelligence and financial regulatory communities will be a tremendous asset as the Treasury Department cracks down on financial crimes across the country and around the world,said Secretary Snow.



Mr. Fox has served in the Office of the General Counsel at the Department of the Treasury since December 2000, in several positions including Deputy Assistant General Counsel for Enforcement and Senior Advisor to the General Counsel.  From 1988 to 2000, Fox served at the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, first as an Attorney in the Bureaus Chicago Office, then as Senior Counsel for Alcohol and Tobacco and finally as Deputy Chief Counsel.   Mr. Fox received both his Bachelors degree and Law degree from Creighton University in Omaha, Nebraska.



Mr. Foxs appointment will be effective December 1, 2003, upon the departure of current Director James F. Sloan.
