---
title: U.S. Acting Treasury Secretary Kenneth W. Dam Remarks on the Inauguration of IRS Free File System
date: 2003-01-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/kd3770
---
*(Archived Content)*

**FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS**



KD-3770



I would agree that Free File is an exciting development, not only for the IRS and the Treasury, but for the federal government and -- not least -- every taxpayer.   This inauguration marks a significant step forward in our efforts to make government more productive, efficient, and taxpayer-friendly.  It also marks a new milestone in public-private coordination.



Taxpaying is one of the most basic obligations of citizenship.  But it need not be slow or mysterious.  Free File promises to reduce the needless frustrations of millions of dutiful citizens as they prepare and file their personal returns.



It also incorporates a variety of features that will reduce filing errors arising from the complexity of the tax code.  In our technologically advanced economy, electronic transactions are nearly ubiquitous.  With Free File, the federal government is finally catching up to the nation we strive to support.



We recognize that our paying customers, the American people, should enjoy the same level of service and convenience that they enjoy from the very best private companies when they deal with their government.



Free File does not entirely close the service gap, but it certainly signifies a dramatic leap forward, from last-century standards to 21st century service.On the receiving side, Free File will allow the IRS to process more returns faster and at lower cost to the taxpayer, permitting more taxpayer resources to reach the programs they are intended to fund.  Electronic filing will reduce processing errors and speed refunds as well.



When we talk about increasing the productivity of our government, we are talking about delivering more and better service for less money.  That is exactly what Free File exemplifies.  Congratulations to all at the IRS, and all the businesses involved in the Free File Alliance, for an important contribution to the future of the United States Government.
