---
title: 'President''s Commission on U.S. Postal Service Announces Subcommittee Members'
date: 2003-01-22
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/kd3783
---
*(Archived Content)*

**FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS**KD-3783

The Presidents Commission on the United States Postal Service today announced the members of its four subcommittees, which were established during the Commissions Jan. 8, 2003 public meeting in Washington, DC.

The subcommittees are comprised of members of the Commission. Commission Co-Chairs James Johnson and Harry Pearce are ex-officio members of each subcommittee.

The Business Model Subcommittee members include Chairman Richard Levin, Don Cogman, Carolyn Gallagher, Norman Seabrook, and Robert Walker. The Subcommittee will be responsible for assessing the Postal Services current government corporationbusiness model.  As part of this assessment, the Subcommittee will study the Postal Services universal service obligation, the mail delivery infrastructure, the current rate regulation system, and pricing flexibility.  This Subcommittee will also assess the Commercial Government Enterprisebusiness model proposed by the Postal Service in its own Transformation Plan.

The Private-Sector Partnership Subcommittee members include Chairman Joseph Wright, Don Cogman and Norman Seabrook. The Subcommittee will be responsible for analyzing the current role of the private sector in the mail delivery system, including negotiated service agreements, outsourcing, and worksharing.   It will also attempt to identify opportunities for the Postal Service to enter into partnerships with the private sector as it seeks to become more efficient and effective.

The Technology Challenges and Opportunities Subcommittee members include Chairman Robert Walker, Dionel Aviles and Joseph Wright. The Subcommittee will be responsible for assessing the impact of new technologies--such online bill payment and presentment, e-mail, and electronic funds transfer--on the Postal Services business and attempt to determine whether these technologies will continue to erode the Postal Services market share.  The Subcommittee will also assess the Postal Services own technology initiatives and their impact on productivity and financial performance.

The Workforce Subcommittee members include Chairwoman Carolyn Gallagher, Dionel Aviles and Richard Levin. The Subcommittee will be responsible for assessing the Postal Services current collective bargaining and dispute resolution procedures as well as reviewing alternative models.  It will review employee pay and other associated labor costs; productivity; employee recruitment, training and development; and workerscompensation claims. The Workforce Subcommittee will also review the status of the Postal Services unfunded pension and retiree health care liabilities.

The nine-member bipartisan Commission, established by President Bush on December 11, 2002, seeks to identify the operational, structural, and financial challenges facing the Postal Service; examine potential solutions; and recommend legislative and administrative steps to ensure the long-term viability of postal service in the United States. The Commission will submit its report to the President by July 31, 2003.
