---
title: President's Commission on the U.S. Postal Service Delivers Report to President Treasury Secretary Snow Commends Commission for Its Work; Urges Postal Service to Study Recommendations Closely
date: 2003-07-31
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js622
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free[Adobe® Acrobat® Reader®](http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep.html).

JS-622

The President's Commission on the United States Postal Service today delivered its final report to Treasury Secretary John W. Snow and President George W. Bush. The report, capping eight months of public meetings on key issues, outlines the Commission's recommendations for legislative and administrative steps that will ensure the long-term viability of postal services in the United States.

"I want to express my appreciation to Commission Co-chairmen Jim Johnson and Harry Pearce for their extraordinary leadership in examining the full breadth of issues facing the Postal Service," said Secretary Snow. "We all know how important this institution is to the nation, and we commend the Commission for proposing a comprehensive business model that will adequately prepare the Postal Service for the 21 st century."

The nine-member bipartisan Commission was established by President Bush on December 11, 2002, with the task to articulate a vision for the future of the Postal Service that ensures efficient, cost-effective operations while minimizing the financial exposure to the taxpayer.   The Commission's report contains recommendations for legislative and administrative reforms in the Postal Service's business model, use of technology, partnerships with the private sector, and the work force.   The Commission was clear in urging that there not be any reduction of mail service that American citizens currently enjoy.

"The Commission has done a terrific job, and we must consider its findings carefully," said Secretary Snow. "The Administration looks forward to working with the Postal Service to ensure they continue to implement reforms within current statutes. We also look forward to working with Congress to examine the full range of issues which may require legislation."

The report can be found on the Commission's website, www.treasury.gov/offices/domestic-finance/usps

-30-

Report(s):

- [USPS Final Report](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/pcusps_report.pdf)
