---
title: 'Media Advisory: President’s Commission on United States Postal Service Holds Final Public Meeting July 23 in Washington, DC'
date: 2003-07-21T00:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/200372111343623117
---
*(Archived Content)*

The President’s Commission on the United States Postal Service will hold its ninth and final public meeting on July 23, 2003 in Washington, DC.

At the meeting, the Commission will receive and consider the recommendations of its Workforce subcommittee and Technology Challenges and Opportunities subcommittee. The Commission also will consider a draft final report to the President. Under Executive Order 13278, the Commission’s final report must be transmitted to the President on or before July 31, 2003.

The meeting will take place at 9:00 am EDT at the Ronald Reagan Building and International Trade Center, Polaris Suite (Concourse Level C), 1300 Pennsylvania Ave., NW, Washington, DC. It is open to the public and the media, and the Commission co-chairmen will be available for questions from the media after the meeting concludes.

The nine-member bipartisan Commission, established by President Bush on December 11, 2002, will identify the operational, structural, and financial challenges facing the Postal Service; examine potential solutions; and recommend legislative and administrative steps to ensure the long-term viability of postal services in the United States. The Commission is co-chaired by James A. Johnson, Vice Chairman of Perseus, L.L.C., and Harry J. Pearce, Chairman of Hughes Electronics Corporation.

Additional information about the Commission can be found at:[www.treasury.gov/offices/domestic-finance/usps](https://www.treasury.gov/offices/domestic-finance/usps)
