---
title: Raising Productivity, Improving Standards of Living, and Promoting Job-Creating Economic Growth in Africa
date: 2003-01-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/kd3806
---
*(Archived Content)*

**FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS**



*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free AdobeAcrobatReader. *

KD-3806



**I. Introduction.**Raising productivityand ultimately, economic growthis the only way of achieving substantial and sustained reductions in poverty. We define productivity as the quantity of goods and services that a worker produces per unit of time with the skills and tools available. Bluntly, the more high productivity jobs there are in a country, the richer the country. However, most African countries do not fare well on this scorethere tend to be only a few high productivity jobs, with the overwhelming majority of jobs characterized by low productivity, resulting in pervasive poverty.



I would like to focus on two interconnected themes: increasing the number of high productivity jobs in African countries, thereby promoting economic growth, and increasing the productivity of African workers generallythereby improving standards of living. We cannot have one without the other. Quite simply, increasing the number of high productivity jobs is meaningless if there are no high productivity workers to fill those jobs, and having a highly productive workforce is equally pointless if there are no jobs for them to take.At the same time, we should see rates of productivity growth increasing at a faster rate in poorer countries than in richer ones. This is what we have seen in East Asia over the past decades. In Africa this has not been the case. Africa is not catching up, due to three severe impediments to productivity growth: poor governance, poor education, and the highly restrictive nature of economic transactions in most African countries.Poor governance and highly restrictive economic environments create a disincentive for the necessary investment to increase the number of high productivity jobs and workers. Poor education also locks the workforce into a low level of productivity.



Due to these three endemic impediments, neither of our keys to developmenta higher productivity workforce and an increasing number of high productivity jobsis realized in most of Africa, and the result is that many Africans are caught in a poverty trap. Let us now consider ways to get out of the trap.



**II. Getting Africa Out of the Poverty Trap by Focusing on Productivity**1. Eliminating the impediment of poor governance.Poor governance is one of the major hindrances to attracting investment. Whether the goal is to attract more firms with high-productivity jobs, or to spur highly productive firms to expand, the goal can be frustrated by high levels of corruption, absence of the rule of law, and lack of enforcement of contracts. Remedial actions can include effective anti-corruption initiatives, modernizing the code of laws, and strengthening the courts.  Another important step is to reduce opportunities for rent-seekingsuch as ad hoc tax exemptions, trade quotas, and dual exchange rates.



Without such remedial actions, the environment will be perceived as unfriendly to investment, the number of high productivity jobs will not increase, and firms will have no incentive to invest further in their workers. Economic growth is likely to stagnate and standards of living are likely to decline. The long term effects of poor governance are very hard to overcome, but taking a strong stand and demonstrating that there is a commitment to improving governance is the first step.



African examples of successful action in this area would include Botswana, South Africa, and our hosts here in Mauritius. Taking the South African example, the government has worked since the onset of majority rule to ensure that the benefits of growth are shared more equitably, fiscal management is more transparent and accountable, and the rule of law is reinforced. The result has included stronger domestic investment and a resumption of growth.2. Eliminating the impediment of poor education.Education is the key to creating a highly productive workforce. We cannot expect investment in high productivity sectors if there is no workforce available to staff such investment. Similarly, we cannot expect a workforce to adopt new technologies that would make them more productive if they lack the requisite skills. Thus, a strong commitment to education in order to create a workforce with high levels of productivity is a prerequisite for sustainable growth and development.



Mauritius is a good example of the connection between education, productivity, and growth. Secondary school enrollment ratio for Mauritius is 53% while the average for Africa is 31%. The countrys relatively educated and skilled manufacturing workforce has an average wage of $336 per month, while in other parts of Africa productivity levels have made possible manufacturing wages of only around $54 per month.



Consequently, investing in education is just as important as investing in plant or equipment. Creating a stronger education system has multiple dimensions, including stronger pro-education policies by the government, a commitment from firms to train and invest in their workers, and innovations such as internet-based teaching.Such initiatives must address both the low enrollment ratios and the gender disparities in education: in Africa, the secondary school enrollment ratio is 35% for boys and 28% for girls. In the end, improving the quality of education must be a high priority.



Investing in people also means investing in health, and specifically addressing the crisis of HIV/AIDS. In countries with adult prevalence rates of 10%, economic growth could be reduced by one-third; rates of 20% could reduce productivity and growth by more than half. There is empirical evidence in some areas that for every 1% decrease in life expectancy, the rate of GDP growth falls by 0.7% and the rate of investment by 1.2%.



3. Eliminating the impediment of restrictive economic environments.Perhaps this is the most obvious of my three points, but can low-productivity developing countries catch up if there are barriers to the very investments which would enable such catch up? Excessive regulation, state monopolies, and lack of openness to trade will force the bulk of productivity-enhancing investment to go elsewhere. This results in the stagnation and further decline of the economic environment, causing both productivity and growth to dwindle further.It is apparent that macroeconomic stability and trade liberalization are keys to attracting productive investment. Keeping inflation levels low, developing domestic financial markets, limiting the claims of governments on domestic savings, and a rational foreign exchange rate regime also are among the requirements for a vibrant economy conducive to private investment. With regard to exchange rates, there are a variety of approaches being applied in Africa, from currency boards to floating against a basket of currencies.  The important point is to maintain a transparent and consistent system of either fixed or floating rates, avoiding the muddled middleof managed floats, which invite abuse.



A useful step toward an enabling environment for investment is to obtain a sovereign credit rating. This can be useful for the government being rated, since it provides direct exposure to market expectations, as well as for investors, since it signals that this is a country committed to creating an environment where domestic and foreign investors should be putting their capital. Another important issue is the composition of public spending, which should be slanted toward investment in people and infrastructure in preference to unproductive purposes such as military spending. In the end, the qualities that investors look for above all else are clarity and stabilityso that they can foresee what risks they must plan for ahead of time.



Uganda has made substantial strides in improving its domestic economic environment, primarily by divesting government holdings in the productive sectors and introducing regulatory reform. Monetary management has been relatively sound and inflation has remained in check. There has been significant progress in redirecting spending toward the social sectors, and devising ways to ensure that funds reach their intended uses in local schools and clinics, for example.Looking forward, the challenges for Uganda are likely to include allowing greater openness to trade and continuing with regulatory reform, in order to create more space for private sector activity.**III. Conclusion**Removing the impediments of poor governance, poor education, and restrictive economic environments is a hugely daunting task. We cannot expect such change overnight, nor for it to come fully and easily. The US will continue to work with sub-Saharan countries bilaterally and through the IFIs in removing these impediments.  Similarly, the conditions that will underlie the Millennium Challenge Accountruling justly, investing in people, and encouraging economic freedomare precisely the policies that will spur productivity growth; policies, moreover, which we believe are entirely consistent with the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD).



Lastly, the US recognizes that large debt burdens are additional obstacles to improved productivity for many of the poorest developing countries. This is why we support the HIPC program, and why we also are encouraging greater use of grants, especially with productivity-enhancing programs. Both these initiatives will increase support to those countries that are prepared to move decisively to enhance productivity. Sustainable and successful economic growth depends on it.

                        

**Related Documents:**


- [Productivity Growth: The Key to Poverty Reduction in Africa,Presentation by John B. Taylor AGOA Forum, Mauritius, January 16, 2002](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/agoaslides.pdf)
