---
title: Treasury Secretary John Snow to visit three South American nations
date: 2003-04-16T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js195
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary John Snow will visit Brazil, Ecuador and Colombia next week to learn first hand how these three nations are building strong economic policies, addressing social problems, and promoting economic growth. All three countries have new leaders with sound, progressive agendas for raising peoples' living standards. This will be Secretary Snow’s first trip to South America as Secretary of the Treasury.

I am looking forward to my visits to Brazil, Ecuador and Colombia, said Snow. Economic success in the entire hemisphere is very important to President Bush. We're seeing good progress in Latin America. Leaders in these nations are courageously working to put sound economic policies in place, encourage economic freedom, and invest in their people. We're traveling to Brazil, Ecuador and Colombia to emphasize these issues and to see evidence of success.

Snow will meet with leaders in government, business, the financial sector, and civil society. In Brazil, Snow will deliver a lunchtime speech to the Brazil-American Chamber of Commerce on Wednesday, April 23. In Ecuador he will learn more about the country’s efforts to grow small and medium sized businesses. A focus in Colombia will be how strengthening security will benefit growth.

Secretary Snow will begin the first leg of his trip in Brasilia, Brazil on Tuesday, April 22 and in Sao Paulo on Wednesday, April 23. He will visit Quito, Ecuador on Thursday, April 24; and end the trip in Colombia on Friday, April 25. He will return to Washington Friday night.

Randall Quarles, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs, will accompany Secretary Snow on the trip.
