---
title: U.S. International Reserve Position
date: 2003-07-22T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/20037221411011849
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the latest week. As indicated in this table, U.S. reserve assets totaled $81,438 million as of the end of that week, compared to $81,941 million as of the end of the prior week.

**I. Official  U.S.  Reserve Assets***(in US millions)*

**TOTAL July 4, 2003 July 11, 2003 81,941 81,438**

1. Foreign Currency Reserves 1

** Euro Yen TOTAL Euro Yen TOTAL**

a. Securities

7,611

13,303

20,914

7,514

13,353

20,866

*Of which, issuer head-quartered in the U.S.*

0

0

b. Total deposits with:
*b.i**. Other central banks and BIS*

12,474

2,671

15,145

12,235

2,681

14,916

*b.ii**. Banks head-quartered in the U.S.*

0

0

b.ii. Of which, banks located abroad

0

0

*b.iii**. Banks head-quartered outside the U.S.*

0

0

b.iii. Of which, banks located in the U.S.

0

0

2. IMF Reserve Position 2

23,180

23,029

3. Special Drawing Rights ( SDRs) 2

11,659

11,583

4. Gold Stock 3

11,044

11,044

5. Other Reserve Assets

0

0

**II. Predetermined Short-Term Drains on Foreign Currency Assets July 4, 2003 July 11, 2003 Euro Yen TOTAL Euro Yen TOTAL**

1. Foreign currency loans and securities

0

0

2. Aggregate short and long positions in forwards and futures in foreign currencies vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar:

*2.a. Short positions*

0

0

*2.b. Long positions*

0

0

3. Other

0

0

**III. Contingent Short-Term Net Drains on Foreign Currency Assets July 4, 2003 July 11, 2003 Euro Yen TOTAL Euro Yen TOTAL**

1. Contingent liabilities in foreign currency

0

0

1.a. Collateral guarantees on debt due within 1 year

1.b. Other contingent liabilities

2. Foreign currency securities with embedded options

0

0

3. Undrawn, unconditional credit lines

0

0

*3.a**. With other central banks*

*3.b**. With banks and other financial institutions*

*head-quartered in the **U.S.*

*3.c**. With banks and other financial institutions*

*head-quartered outside the **U.S.*

4. Aggregate short and long positions of options in foreign

Currencies vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar

0

0

*4.a. Short positions*

4.a.1. Bought puts

4.a.2. Written calls

*4.b. Long positions*

4.b.1. Bought calls

4.b.2. Written puts

**Notes:**

1/ Includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (SOMA), valued at current market exchange rates. Foreign currency holdings listed as securities reflect marked-to-market values, and deposits reflect carrying values.Foreign Currency Reserves for the latest week may be subject to revision.Foreign Currency Reserves for the prior week are final.

2/Theitems, "2.IMF Reserve Position" and "3.Special Drawing Rights ( SDRs)," are based on data provided by the IMF and are valued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate for the reporting date. The entries for the latest week reflect any necessary adjustments, including revaluation, by the U.S. Treasury to the prior week’s IMF data.IMF data for the latest week may be subject to revision.IMF data for the prior week are final.

3/ Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce.
