---
title: TESTIMONY OF ROBERT STANLEY NICHOLS NOMINEE TO BE TREASURY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC AFFAIRS, DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY BEFORE THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE
date: 2003-07-30
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js617
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-617

Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Baucus, and members of the Senate Finance Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. It is a great privilege to be considered for the position of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Public Affairs. I am honored that President Bush has nominated me to serve in this position, and that you are taking the time to consider my nomination.  I also thank Secretary Snow for his leadership and for having the confidence in me to serve in this post.Mr. Chairman, the Treasury Department an agency with a long and rich history of service to the nation dating back to 1789 - is at the center of President Bush's efforts to create jobs and economic growth.  If I am confirmed by the Senate, I look forward to making the case publicly for the President's economic agenda and to keeping you and your committee informed of Treasurys work.Within the department, the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs plays a leading role in educating the American people about tax and currency policy, debt management, Social Security and Medicare financing, and a host of international issues that impact our prosperity.    A large part of this job is representing the Presidents views on an issue to the media, and through them, to the general public.  I look forward to doing that and working with the press corps to keep the American people informed about the decisions that are being made here in Washington, D.C.

Members of the committee, while I am proud to have been nominated for many fundamental reasons, there is one I wish to share today.  I deeply believe that President Bushs recent economic growth proposal moves the U.S. economy in the right direction. It is an investment in the American people and their future. It will give the economy the boost it needs to grow and create jobs so that millions of Americans can be more secure and confident, both now and in the future.  It is an honor to be associated with this Presidents economic leadership.

Mr. Chairman, I am grateful to you for bringing me before this Committee and respectfully ask that I be permitted to introduce my wife Rebecca to you and members of the Committee.
