---
title: Treasury Calls for Large Position Reports
date: 2003-07-08T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js531
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-531

The Treasury is calling for Large Position Reports from those entities whose reportable position in the 3-5/8% Treasury Notes of May 2013 equals or exceeds $2 billion as of close of business Monday, July 7, 2003.  This call for Large Position Reports is a test.  Entities with reportable positions in this note equal to or exceeding this $2 billion threshold must report these positions to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  Entities with positions in this note below $2 billion are not required to file Large Position Reports.  Reports, which must include the required position and administrative information, must be received by the Government Securities Dealer Statistics Unit of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York before noon Eastern time on Monday, July 14, 2003.  Large Position Reports may be filed by facsimile at (212) 720-5030 or delivered to the Bank at 33 Liberty Street, 4th floor.

** Details on Call for Large Position Reports Security Description**: 3-5/8% Treasury Notes of May 2013, Series B-2013**CUSIP Number:**912828 BA 7**CUSIP Number of STRIPS Principal Component:**912820 HX 8**Maturity Date:**May 15, 2013**Date for Which Information Must Be Reported:**July 7, 2003 as of COB**Large Position Reporting Threshold:**$2 Billion (Par Value)**Date Report Is Due**:     July 14, 2003, before noon Eastern time

This call for large position information is made under Treasury's large position reporting rules (17 CFR Part 420).  The notice calling for Large Position Reports is also being published in the Federal Register.  This press release and a copy of a sample Large Position Report, which appears in Appendix B of the rules at 17 CFR Part 420, are available at the Bureau of the Public Debt's Internet site at the following address:[www.publicdebt.treas.gov](http://www.publicdebt.treas.gov/).

Questions about Treasury's large position reporting rules should be directed to Public Debt's Government Securities Regulations Staff at (202) 691-3632.  Questions regarding the method of submission of Large Position Reports may be directed to the Government Securities Dealer Statistics Unit of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at (212) 720-1449.
