---
title: Snow praises agreement to strengthen the economy
date: 2003-05-22T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/20035221524214159
---
*(Archived Content)*

After the House and Senate agreed to a plan to enact President Bush's jobs and growth plan, TREASURY SECRETARY JOHN SNOW today stated, The historic agreement between the House and the Senate on the    President's Jobs and Growth Plan is a great victory for hardworking  Americans. The Agreement will give the economy the boost it needs to  grow and create jobs so that millions of Americans can be more secure  and confident, both now and in the future.

It contains all the elements of the President's plan.  American  families will benefit from speeding up the income tax rate reductions,    increasing the child credit, and providing marriage penalty relief.  Small businesses will get help by reducing tax rates on owners and  entrepreneurs, and by dramatically increasing the amount they can  deduct when buying new equipment.  This will create and secure jobs.

It dramatically reduces the tax on dividends and investment.  This will have a profoundly positive effect on job creation, corporate accountability, and the well being of all Americans.  It removes barriers to higher economic growth, and represents an investment in the American people and their prosperity.

This bill is good for American workers, it is good for American families, it is good for American investors and it is good for American entrepreneurs and small business owners.

With agreement on President Bush's Jobs and Growth plan, the elements are there for the economy to continue its recovery in the second half of the year.I urge Congress to send this bill to the President's desk as quickly as possible. The economy can't wait another day to get the boost it needs.
