---
title: Remarks of Michael A. Dawson Deputy Assistant Secretary For Critical Infrastructure Protection and Compliance Policy at the Conference on Critical Financial Infrastructure Protection
date: 2003-12-04T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1032
---
*(Archived Content)*

js-1032

I am here in North Carolina today to talk about what we are doing in Washington to help you protect the critical financial infrastructure.  I don't have to tell anyone in North Carolina that the critical financial infrastructure exists outside of Washington.  North Carolina is an important center of financial innovation.  Institutions like the Bank of America, Wachovia, BB&T, and the Latino Community Credit Union all attest to North Carolina's strong tradition of financial innovation and leadership.

In partnership with the FDIC, the Department of the Treasury and our colleagues in the public and private sectors are speaking to audiences in twenty-four cities across the United States. After our eighteen month tour, we will have spoken to 6,000 individuals; on average, 250 people per city. Through this outreach, we hope to encourage you – stewards of financial services in North Carolina – to take advantage of policies and programs that will further strengthen the U.S. critical financial infrastructure.

This is an issue that is very important to the Department of the Treasury.  At the Treasury, we are responsible for developing and promoting policies that create jobs and improve the economy.  We are equally concerned with developing and promoting policies that enhance the resiliency of the economy, policies that minimize the economic damage and speed economic recovery from a terrorist attack.  In addition to these general responsibilities, the President has named Treasury as the lead agency to enhance the resiliency of the critical financial infrastructure.

These two responsibilities are closely related.  As Secretary Snow has said, the financial system is the engine of our economy.  In a very real sense, the resilience of the American economy depends on the resilience of the American financial system.Fortunately, we are starting from a very strong base.  The American economy is remarkably resilient.  Over the past few years, we have seen that resilience first hand, as the American economy withstood a significant fall in equity prices, a recession, the terrorist attacks of September 11, a rash of corporate governance scandals, and power outage of August 14-15.  There are many reasons for the resilience of the American economy.  Good policies have played an important part.   So has the resilience of the American people.  One of the reasons we are so strong is that our people are so tough, so determined to protect our way of life.

Like the economy as a whole, the American financial system is remarkably resilient.  During the power outage in August that affected cities from Cleveland to New York City, for example, the financial system performed extraordinarily well. With one exception, the bond and major equities and futures markets were open the next day at their regular trading hours.  Major market participants were well prepared, having invested in contingency plans, procedures, and equipment such as backup power generators.  This resilience mitigates the economic risks of terrorist attacks, both to the financial system itself and to the American economy as a whole.

Although we are starting from a strong base, the fact remains that we are still exposed to significant risks of economic disruption from terrorist attacks.

Four principles guide our efforts to manage these risks.  These principles guided our decisions as the financial system recovered from the attacks of September 11th. They guide our actions still.The first principle is to remember that the financial system is really about people.  People, not buildings or computers, produce financial services.  And it is people who benefit from financial services.

We depend on people to run the financial system.  We need these people -- tellers, technicians, loan officers, technicians, technologists -- to see the system through times of stress.   Indeed, it was the commitment of these professionals to their institutions, customers, and colleagues that helped the financial system recover from the attacks of September 11th and weather the power outage of August 14-15.

Just as we depend on people to run the financial system, people depend on the financial system to run.  Virtually every American depends on financial services to get their paycheck, buy their groceries, purchase a house, finance their children's education, or save for retirement.  We must ensure that people continue to have confidence that the financial system will meet their needs.The second principle is the importance of maintaining confidence.   Confidence in the ability of financial institutions to clear checks, execute transactions, and satisfy insurance obligations helps the system weather significant disruption from evolving threats.  By relying on a sound financial system, Americans can make business decisions for the future and conduct necessary business in the present.The third principle is to ensure that the financial system remains accessible and open for business when the safety of the employees permits. During times of disaster, investors depend on markets to price the impact of the disruption on assets. The longer markets are closed, the longer investors must go without knowing what the impact will be. This uncertainty can itself be harmful to the economy, compounding the impact of any disruption. The sooner we can eliminate this uncertainty, the more we can mitigate the impact and speed recovery.Fourth, we want to promote responsible decision-making and problem-solving within the private sector. Financial institutions should make the appropriate decisions without waiting for guidance from Washington. After all, it is the private sector that owns and operates the majority of the financial systems. And it is the private sector that best knows how to help these systems recover from a disruption. We will help when needed, but we intend for the private sector to find the necessary solutions.With these principles in mind, we have organized ourselves into two main groups.  One is the Financial and Banking Information Infrastructure Committee (FBIIC).  The FBIIC is sponsored by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets and consists of many state and federal regulators.  The FDIC, which organized this conference today, is a member.  So too are the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, the Conference of State Banking Supervisors, and many other important regulators.  Treasury chairs the FBIIC.

Another important group is the Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council (FSSCC).  The FSSCC consists of virtually every important financial services association.  The FSSCC is coordinated by Rhonda MacLean, an executive based here in Charlotte with Bank of America.  Treasury was pleased to appoint Rhonda to this position.  She has done an outstanding job.

Together, the FBIIC and the FSSCC work to systematically identify the critical financial infrastructure, identify vulnerabilities in that infrastructure, address the vulnerabilities, and evaluate our progress.

These are the principles and structures that guide our actions in managing the risks of terrorism to our financial system.  But what are our actions?  What are we doing that will help you manage the risks you face?  Let me highlight just three.  You will learn more about these – and other opportunities – during the course of the day from other speakers.

First, we have helped to develop a next generation Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Center (FS/ISAC).  Since 1999, the FS/ISAC has been a leader in information sharing for the financial sector, allowing members to receive and submit anonymous reports on security threats and solutions.  The FS/ISAC, however, has been limited in scope.  It focused primarily on cyber threats.  And it served only 56 financial institutions, albeit 56 of the biggest ones.  In addition, Congress has expressed concern over the technological capabilities of the FS/ISAC.  Shortly, Treasury will help launch a new and improved FS/ISAC.  This next generation FS/ISAC will include both cyber and physical threat information; serve the entire sector, not just 56 large institutions; and deploy a secure, confidential technology platform where companies can exchange information in real time as they identify vulnerabilities, address the vulnerabilities, and respond to attempts to exploit the vulnerabilities.  You can learn more about how your financial institution can benefit from the FS/ISAC at[www.fsisac.com](http://www.fsisac.com).Second, we have recently reached an agreement with Assistant Secretary Patrick Hughes of the Department of Homeland Security to detail an expert in financial services issues to the Information Analysis directorate of the Homeland Security Department.  Initially, this person will be a Department of the Treasury employee.  Over time, however, we will rotate other employees from other financial regulators through the Department.  In so doing, we will ensure that financial services issues and perspectives are considered early in the process of evaluating information about terrorist threats.  The resulting product will help federal, state, and local authorities better protect our financial infrastructure.  As important, when we are able to share that information with the private sector, it will help the owners and operators of that infrastructure better manage risks.

Third, we have developed proven procedures for secure communications between federal and state financial regulators.  During times of crisis, these communications procedures help financial regulators share information about the impact of an event on the financial institutions regulated by that regulator.  By pooling information about the impact of a disruption, we can together form a quick, accurate assessment of the overall impact of an event on the financial sector as a whole.  This information helps guide our action as regulators.  But, more importantly, we can share the information with financial institutions and help them better weather the disruption.    This system worked in real time during the power outage of August 14-15 and its results were summarized in a report to Congress in October of 2003.  (The report is available at[http://www.treas.gov/offices/domestic-finance/financial-institution/cip/pdf/impact.pdf](https://home.treasury.gov/about/organizational-structure/offices/Domestic-Finance/Documents/impact.pdf))

These are but three of our recent actions.  They highlight the importance we place on developing accurate and timely information about threats and sharing that information with the private sector.  As more and better information about the threats they face becomes available, the people in the private sector who own and operate our financial infrastructure can better estimate the risks they bear.  Furthermore, they can better invest to reduce the probability of a threat against their infrastructure, thereby lessening the consequences that a disruption might pose.

Thank you for your time today.  Thank you for attending this important conference.
