---
title: Statement by Treasury Secretary John Snow in advance of meetings of the G7, IMF and World Bank
date: 2003-04-10T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js178
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-178

Good afternoon.  I look forward to hosting Central American Ministers tomorrow, and G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors tomorrow evening and Saturday morning.Economic growth is always at the top of our agenda.  It is particularly important at this time when the world economy is falling far short of its potential.  To bring about a strong recovery, each of our countries must act decisively to implement strong policies to spur economic growth.  The United States has done its part by moving quickly and aggressively to ease both monetary and fiscal policy.  The President’s Jobs and Growth program will accelerate the U.S. economic recovery and raise economic growth.  I will reiterate to my colleagues tomorrow the importance of implementing strong policies, including structural reforms, suitable to their economic situation in order to contribute to global growth.  We must also reduce barriers to trade through implementation of the Doha Development Agenda as trade liberalization will also significantly add to global economic growth – in the industrial economies, in emerging market economies and -- most importantly -- in developing economies.Combating terrorist financing will be another focus of our discussions.  The cooperation and leadership among G7 nations in this area is notable and continues.  We will review achievements and determine how to maximize further progress.  Hard work remains ahead to keep our financial institutions and systems safe from abuse by terrorists.  The ongoing programs of the IMF, World Bank, Financial Action Task Force, and other international bodies to address our common challenge are vital.  The United States has taken aggressive action to ensure that Iraqi assets are being put to use for the Iraqi people.  This weekend I intend to encourage all nations to identify, marshal and eventually return to the Iraqi people assets associated with the corrupt regime of Saddam Hussein.  These assets should be put to work to help the Iraqi people.

Crisis prevention and resolution remain priorities for us.  We will review progress made over the last year in strengthening our crisis prevention strategy and establishing a more orderly and predictable process for the restructuring of sovereign debt.  We welcome the strong leadership that Mexico has shown by demonstrating that emerging market countries can successfully issue debt with new clauses that would help promote a more orderly restructuring process.

We encourage others to follow Mexico’s lead.  The IMF’s work on a centralized sovereign debt restructuring mechanism has raised important issues.  It has advanced this important issue but clearly, given the reactions of markets and emerging market countries, it is time to move forward with collective action clauses.  These clauses, and not the Fund’s sovereign debt restructuring mechanism, are the vehicle to resolve these issues connected with sovereign debt restructuring.  Therefore, it is neither necessary nor feasible to continue working on SDRM.

We will also discuss ongoing work to promote growth and reduce poverty in developing countries.  Sound policies and measurable results are the first steps toward these goals.    We continue to stress the importance of measuring results as part of our International Development Association contribution.  President Bush’s Millennium Challenge Account will provide substantial additional assistance to reward strong policies and performance.  The President has requested $1.3 billion for this account this year, and has proposed to increase this to $5 billion by year three and thereafter.I also expect to have a substantive conversation with my G7 counterparts about how our nations and international institutions can work together to help the Iraqi people recover – not just from 25 days of conflict, but from 25 years of economic misrule.  As President Bush has emphasized, the international institutions will have a vital role to play in the reconstruction of Iraq.  The World Bank, the IMF and other institutions should be prepared to offer their expertise and technical assistance as soon as possible.  Our discussion should also include beginning to review the issue of Iraqi debt.  As Finance Ministers we are in a unique position to offer our talents, our ideas and our leadership as we look forward to a historic effort to help the Iraqi people take control of their nation.Finally, I also look forward to starting off the weekend with a special meeting with ministers from the Central America region.  We will discuss the specific challenges of that region – in particular, emphasizing efforts to promote economic growth through the implementation of strong fiscal policies, the development of small and medium-sized enterprises and attracting foreign investment, the importance of strengthening governance and fighting corruption, and our joint efforts to combat terrorist financing.    Trade liberalization also remains an important priority for the region.
