---
title: First Quarterly Update of the 2003 - 2004 Priority Guidance Plan Joint Statement
date: 2003-11-03T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js968
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free AdobeAcrobatReader. *

JS-968

**By:Pamela F. OlsonAssistant Secretary (Tax Policy)U.S. Department of the TreasuryMark W. EversonCommissionerInternal Revenue ServiceEmily A. ParkerActing Chief CounselInternal Revenue Service**We are pleased to announce the first quarterly update of the 2003 - 2004 Priority Guidance Plan.

On July 24, 2003, we released the 2003 - 2004 Priority Guidance Plan listing 268 projects for the plan year beginning July 1, 2003 and ending June 30, 2004.  In our Joint Statement that accompanied the release of the 2003 - 2004 Priority Guidance Plan, we emphasized our commitment to increased and more timely published guidance.  We indicated that we would update the plan quarterly to reflect additional guidance that we intend to publish during the plan year.  Updating the plan also provides flexibility to respond to developments arising during the year.

The attached update sets forth the guidance on the original 2003 - 2004 Priority Guidance Plan that we have published.  Although the update may indicate that a particular item on the plan has been completed, it is possible that one or more additional projects may be completed in the plan year relating to that item.  The update also includes 20 items of additional guidance, some of which have already been published.We continue to invite the public to provide us with comments and suggestions as we identify and write guidance throughout the plan year.

The updated 2003 -2004 Priority Guidance Plan will be republished on the IRS website on the Internet ([www.irs.gov](http://www.irs.gov/)) under Tax Professionals, IRS Resources, Administrative Information and Resources, 2003 - 2004 Priority Guidance Plan.  Copies can also be obtained by calling Treasurys Office of Public Affairs at (202) 622-2960.

 

**Related Documents:**

- [First Quarterly Update of the 2003 - 2004 Priority Guidance Plan](https://home.treasury.gov/about/organizational-structure/offices/Tax-Policy/Documents/20032004glp1st.pdf)
