---
title: Presentation of Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Executive Director Jeffrey Bragg To the Vermont Captive Insurance Association
date: 2003-08-11
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js647
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-647

**Slide 1: Introduction Slide 2:**

Good afternoon and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today onTreasury's progress and plansfor implementing the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002, otherwise referred to as TRIA.

On November 26, 2002, President Bush signed TRIA into law.

With an estimated $40B in insured losses as a result of the events of 9/11 the market for terrorism coverage became severely disrupted.

However in addition to wanting to address Insurance industry disruptions,the Congress and the President recognized that such widespreaddislocationsin insurance marketsalso had a negative impact on business' ability to finance economic activity and recovery.

TRIA was therefore enacted to stabilize the availability of insurance protectionas well as to stabilize the overall economy.

**Slide 3:**

TRIA effectively places the Federal Government temporarily in the terrorism risk reinsurance business:

The program provides coverage for commercial lines P&C losses including workers' compensation.

Coverage is triggered when theSecretary of the TreasurytheSecretary of Stateand theAttorneyGeneraltogether certify that an act of terrorism carried out on behalf of a foreign interest has occurred:

This terrorism generated loss must be greater than $5M

And. the event must have taken place in the US, or a US foreign mission, or on a US air carrier or vessel.

**Slide 4:**

One of the first things that had to be defined under the act was what constitutes a P&C insurer.

This task was more difficult than it first appeared. However Insurer for purposes of the act is any entity that is:

Licensed oradmittedfor primary or excess insurance in any state

A surplus lines carrier on the quarterly NAIC listing of alien insurers

Insurers approved by a federal agency in connection withmaritime, energy, or aviation activity

A State residual market or workers compensation fund

Altogether well over 2000 insurance companies are participating in the program.

But understandably programs with current federal exposure like the National Flood Insurance Program are not included.

Also insurance products includingassumed reinsurance, health and life insurance and for now group life insurance are excluded from the program.

**Slide 5:**

Like any program there are restrictions.

Deductibles increaseover the 3 year termof the program and are expressed as a percent of an insurer's direct earned premium.

The Federal Governments share under the program is equal to90% of that portion of insured lossesthat exceed the insurer deductible.

While there is a cap on total insured losses: if total losses exceed the cap Congress will determine the procedures for and source of payments for those excess losses.

The program is scheduled to end on December 31, 2005

Many of you here today believe that all federal programs last forever. However the Former Riot Reinsurance Program and the Former Federal Crime Insurance Program are 2 examples ofgovernment insurance mechanismsthat have been discontinued when it became clear that their temporary mission had been fulfilled.

**Slide 6:**

There are provisions under the act whereby the Secretary can recoup certain government payments

Mandatory recoupment is triggered whenever there is a loss and theinsurance industry paid lossesare less than that year's industry retention.

Theannual industry retentionis equal to the lesser of a dollar amount which was fixed by Congress or the actual aggregate insured losses.

Aggregate Insured lossesare all the losses associated with an act of terrorism that are within an insurer's deductible and the 10% of insured loss quota share.

Under mandatory recoupment The Secretary will establishTerrorism Loss Risk Sharing Premiumsof up to a 3% surcharge on all commercial policy premiums

In addition The Secretary can depending on economic conditionsimpose an additional discretionary recoupment programwhereby additional surcharges on insurance premiums can be collected.

**Slide 7:**

To illustrate lets assume there is a $20B covered loss during the 3rdyear of the program

This Loss isgreater than the insurance industry'smaximum aggregate retention that year of $15B.

Further assume that 100 insurance companies were exposed to that loss and that their collective direct earned premiums totaled $20B.

The third year deductible of 15% equals $3B for these 100 companies and their10% quota share equals another $1.7Bmaking the 100 insurer's share of the total paid losses for the companies involved $4.7B.

Under this example Treasury would pay $15.3B, which is the difference between thetotal insured lossand the losses paid by the 100 involved companies.

However, under the law Treasury is required to recoup $10.3B which is the difference betweenthe industry aggregate retentionof $15B and the $4.7B paid by the 100 companies.

To accomplish this all companies covered under the programwould impose up to a 3% premium surchargeon all commercial policy holders until $10.3B had been recouped and paid to Treasury.

Additionally depending on economic considerations the Secretary of the Treasury hasdiscretionary authorityto impose additional recoupment surcharges and could recoup up to the entire $20B loss.

**Slide 8:**

The Terrorism Risk Insurance Program or T.R.I.P. is itself under Treasury'sDepartment for Domestic Finance(headed by Under Secretary Peter Fisher) and the Office of Financial Institutions (headed by Assistant Secretary Wayne Abernathy).

TRIP's responsibilities include all of the operational functions necessary toeffectively implement and manage the program, including all claims management and processing functions, as well as all auditing functions

TRIP is in essence the insurance company created by the new law.

However 2 additional Treasury offices play an important part in the program.

Treasury'sOffice of Economic Policywill be conducting studies associated with coverage issue under TRIA and the overall effectiveness of the program.

The office ofFinancial Institutions Policyhas been responsible for promulgating rules and regulations for the program and will continue to assist TRIP in rule making as we move to the operational phase of the program.

**Slide 9:**

Already substantial progress has been made in implementing the program

The Office of Financial Institutions Policy has been extremely active in implementing the regulations necessary to support the new act.

They have issued

- 4 interim guidance notices
- 2 interim final rules
- 1 notice of proposed rulemaking
- A final rule.

**Slide 10:**

The final rule published in the federal register on July 11 sets forth key definitions that Treasury will use in implementing the program.

Among other things this rule addresses:

- Guidance on the Lines of Insurance covered under the act
- Which entities are eligible for participation
- Control and affiliation issues

The Insurance industry generally and many of your representatives specifically have been very helpful in representing your views to the Treasury Department on these and other issues.

However I urge all of youto review these regulations closely to make certain you are in compliance with the act and can take advantage of this important federal protection.

**Slide 11:**

One of the most discussed issues in the new regulations was the definitions of affiliate and what constitutes control. The issue is importantbecause it goes to the heart of understandingthe appropriate deductible to assign various affiliated insurance groups.

Conclusive Control Exists

- if an insurer has power to vote 25% or more of any class ofvoting securitiesof the other insurer.
- if an insurer controls theelection of a majorityof the Directors or Trustees of the other insurer.

Presumptive Control Exists

If the Secretary of the Treasury determines that an insurer exercises acontrolling influenceover another insurer.

In determining presumptive control The Secretary will consider approximately 11 other factors outlined in the regulationsthe presence of any 2could lead to a determination of presumptive control

Hopefully it comes as no surprise to you that in Washington we do read the insurance trade publications. And we have noticed that some industry trade journals havedescribed a number of gamingstrategies to reduce an insurer's exposure, including mechanisms tothwart the affiliate and control guidelines. Please understand that we will do all that is necessary to maintain the integrity of the program and toprevent the evasionof insurer deductibles under TRIA

**Slide 12:**

However we do understand that these rules and regulations can be confusing and that honest minds can differover themeaning,intent, and interpretationof all aspects of the program.

In fact these rules envision that therewill be some confusionover many issues including the definition of an insurer and what constitutes a controlling interest.

We continue to receive many questions on these and many other topics. So if after reviewing these regulations in some detail you still have questionsyou may request an interpretationof the regulations as they apply to your specific situation.

In submitting your request it is not necessary to compose a lengthydissertationand we will make every effort to respond to your issues in a timely manner

**Slide 13:**

The ink is not yet dry on there final rules and we are already working to finalize a second set of rules which will address and finalize such issues as:

 
- Make available requirements
- Disclosure requirements
- State residual markets

Unfortunately this process is really never ending.

Thousands of pages ofrules, definitions, procedures,andregulationswill be drafted, debated, and finalized over the next 3 years. And believe me there are still many issues to deal with.

**Slide 14:**

Even though much has been accomplished, considerable work remains. Many in the industry have expressed concerns over such program issues as:

- Adverse selection
- Continued lack of reinsurance availability
- Huge exposures particularly in worker's compensation
- Affordability

In fact most of these issues have been volatile at various and numerous times in the past.

TRIA was passed in part to address them.These issues are in fact characteristic of other past Federal Insurance programs.

I believe that over time the free market will help solve these problems whileTRIA contributes over timeto help build capacity and stabilize the market. Again this was precisely what the program was designed to do.

**Slide 15:**

Right now, what keeps me awake at night are operational issues.We have a huge amount of work ahead of usand not very much time to accomplish it.

In addition to having a tremendous amount to accomplish to get our program up and runningwe have also had to put emergency procedures in placeso that should there be a loss before we are fully operational we will be able to respond to that loss.

In essence this means working on aduel approachto make certain we are prepared.

So as we go about implementing all of issues you see before you and more let me describe the last bullet on the slide in more detail.

Through out my career both in the private sector and with my government service I have been astrong advocate of outsourcing functionsthat can be better handled by others with more experience and expertise.

I have also where possible created partnerships between the government and private sector insurance industrywhich draws on the strengths of both entitiesto create a more successful program. That was why we created the Write Your Own program for the National Flood Insurance Program many years ago.

Therefore it should come as no surprise that in implementing this program we will not be creating a huge infrastructure.

Rather we will establish avirtual companythat permits us to form new partnerships with the private insurance sector, harnessing thatInsurance Industry's talents and skillsto make this an effective streamlined operation.

**Slide 16**

In addition to the overall operational issues we just discussed we also knowthere are many specific claims issuesto deal with including the speed with which we will be able to reimburse insures all the way down the listto the mechanismsby which we will audit our own payments.

Hopefully it will come as good news to you that we intend that claims made under the programwill be processed and paid in a manner highly consistentwith what you now experience with the reinsurance industry.

In implementing all of the requirements necessary to pass our own audits, as well as theexpected GAO audits, we will be mindful of current insurance industry practices standards and needs.

We will do our best to meet those needsas well as protect the people's assetswithout overreaching.

**Conclusion:**

Ladies and gentlemen like all of you I sincerely hope and pray that this program willnever be tested. But with your help we can at least try to be prepared should our nation ever again be required to call upon our industry to respond to the needs of our insured's

As in the past I look forward to working with the industry on this new venture and in closing thank you for your time here today as well as for your future support.
