---
title: 'Treasury Department Announces Marin''s Plan to Leave Treasury'
date: 2003-05-22
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js400
---
*(Archived Content)*



FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS



JS-400



The Treasury Department today announced that United States Treasurer Rosario Marin will resign effective June 30, 2003.



Rosario Marin has been an outstanding United States Treasurer.  We will miss her leadership, commitment, energy and dedication,said Treasury Secretary John Snow.



Marin played an essential role at the Treasury Department over the last two years and has been at the forefront of several key policy debates ranging from financial literacy to the Partnership for Prosperity, and from reducing counterfeiting of our currency to issuing the Patriot Savings Bond.   Marin also served on the Presidents Commission on Excellence in Education for Hispanic Americans.



Among other duties, Marin has been one of the Administrations top officials tasked with communicating President Bush's efforts to keep America's economy strong and to spread prosperity around the world.



Marin brought invaluable experience to her position and with that background and perspective, she played an important role in shaping many of the public policy debates within the Administration and on Capitol Hill,Snow concluded.(Attachment: Marin Letter)May 22, 2003The Honorable John W. SnowSecretaryDepartment of the Treasury1500 Pennsylvania AveWashington, DC. 20220Dear Mr. Secretary Snow:It has been my distinct privilege and great honor to serve our nation as a member of President George W. Bush administration.  Words could not begin to describe my profound gratitude for the opportunity to serve along with the best and the brightest in the federal government during these historic times in our nation.During my tenure, I was fortunate to have been part of Treasurys efforts on issues that are very dear to me: from financial literacy to Partnership for Prosperity, from reducing counterfeiting of our currency to issuing the Patriot Savings Bond, while also serving on the Presidents Commission on Excellence in Education for Hispanic Americans.  I have been so lucky!After a long and thoughtful consideration, my family and I have decided to go back home to California, thus I submit my resignation effective June 30, 2003.Mr. Secretary, America indeed is the greatest country in the world and the land of opportunity; where for the first time in its history, an immigrant became its 41st Treasurer.  I will always treasure the honor and will be indebted to our President for such distinction.  May God Bless you and all my colleagues as you continue to set policies that will guide our nations economic prosperity.Sincerely,Rosario Marin
