---
title: rr3178
date: 2003-06-26
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js508
---
*(Archived Content)*

    

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-508



****



The reason we are here today is to discuss financial mechanisms that are able to mitigate some of the risks of doing business in Africa.   Riskboth real and perceivedis the primary reason more capital is not flowing to Africa. Africa represents incredible potential. While capital flows have occurred quite successfully elsewhere, most notably in Asia, Africa has been left behind. Despite Africas enormous potential, low cost labor, and vast natural resources, investors, quite frankly, remain wary. They are afraid of putting their money in a place which all too often is perceived (however true or not) as a continent wracked by war, famine, AIDS, and corruption.



Although specific financial mechanisms are necessary, they can not address all the risks that confront businesses in Africa.  We in the United States have been working with African countries and our donor partners to reduce this risk.  The key areas of focus are: (1) challenging African governments to rapidly and significantly improve their investment environments; (2) facilitating new ways to engage the private sector with Africa; and, (3) working with the IFIs to strengthen the financial systems of Africa to support productive investment.



**I. Challenging Africas Governments **



First and foremost, the strongest way to mitigate investment risk requires African governments to change their investment environments. The Millennium Challenge Account focuses on improving the investment environment by directing more resources to countries committed to ruling justly, investing in people, and encouraging economic freedom. The Administrations intention is to provide an additional $5 billion a year by 2006 to strong-performing poor countries.



**Ruling Justly**In Africa, poor governance including corruption, limited rule of law, and lack of enforcement of contracts -- scares off domestic and foreign investors. Ruling justly is critical to reversing that trend.  Actions African governments must take include effective anti-corruption initiatives, and strengthening of the courts. Another important step is to reduce opportunities for rent-seekingsuch as ad hoc tax exemptions and investment incentives, trade quotas, and dual exchange rates.



To be sure, there are already African countries taking these steps. The Zambian Governments recently-established Task Force on Corruption has seized property improperly acquired with public funds and re-channeled those funds to education and agriculture programs. The Kenyan Parliament recently passed two anti-corruption bills which had been pending for many years.  In South African, the government has worked since the onset of majority rule to ensure that the benefits of growth are shared more equitably, fiscal management is more transparent and accountable, and the rule of law is reinforced.



**Investing in People**For high and sustained economic growth, the composition of government spending in Africa needs to be slanted much more towards investment in people and infrastructure. Creating a better-educated and more productive workforce requires sufficient public investment in schools and teachers, and a commitment from businesses to train their workers. Let us look to Mauritius.  In 1999, the secondary school enrollment ratio was 58% while the average for Africa is 31%.  The average manufacturing wage is $336 per month, compared with $54 per month in other parts of Africa.  This means a more skilled workforce and rising productivity.



Investing in people also means investing in health.  In countries with HIV/AIDS rates of 10%, economic growth is reduced by up to one-third and a 20% rate may reduce productivity and growth by more than half.



The African Development Bank has specifically targeted investment in the education and health sectors.  Bank lending in these sectors reached 15% of total loans last year.  In May 2003, President Bush signed legislation aimed at providing $15 billion to prevent new infections, treating HIV-infected people and providing care for HIV-infected individuals and AIDS orphans.  Close to 20 million Africans will benefit. Here again, the U.S. is committed to reducing the real investment risk that HIV/AIDS is casting over the continent.



**Economic Freedom**The third MCA pillar is an environment conducive to private sector investment and entrepreneurship. All too often, excessive regulation, state monopolies, and lack of openness to trade result in productivity-enhancing investment going elsewhere.Macroeconomic stability and trade liberalization are keys to attracting productive investment. Keeping inflation levels low, developing domestic financial markets, limiting the claims of governments on domestic savings, and a sustainable foreign exchange rate regime also are among the requirements for a vibrant economy conducive to private investment.



Botswana is an example of a stable, market-oriented African economy.  There are few non-tariff barriers and no foreign exchange controls, price controls, or price subsidies. Contracts and property rights are respected. Moodys and Standard and Poors call it the best credit risk in Africa despite the macroeconomic challenges presented by the HIV/AIDS epidemic.



Ghana took a very systematic approach to reforming its financial sector in the early 1990s.  In the first phase of those reforms, the government placed ceilings on net bank credit to the government to avoid crowding out the private sector. While administrative controls on interest rates remained in place, they were gradually relaxed. The second phase of reform focused on liberalizing controls on interest rates and bank credit. In the third phase, there was a gradual shift from a direct system of monetary controls to an indirect system that utilized market-based policy instruments.



As part of the process, the Bank of Ghana rationalized the minimum reserve requirements for banks, introduced new financial instruments, and absorbed excess liquidity from open market operations. These policies were complemented by strengthening the soundness of the banking system by improving the regulatory framework, strengthening bank supervision, and improving the efficiency and profitability of banks, including the replacement of their non-performing assets. In the final stage of this process, Ghana has embarked on the privatization of the major publicly owned banks.



**II. Engaging the Private Sector with Africa**



The second way the U.S. is working to help mitigate investment risk in Africa is by working to create ways to promote private sector led growth. As one example, last year, the U.S. launched a project to fund a number of sub-Saharan African countries to get their initial sovereign credit ratings. This promotes several benefits.  First, the process of getting a rating helps countries focus on things international investors care about, perhaps most importantly, timely and high quality data.  Sovereign credit ratings can help investors even in non-debt investments evaluate the economic environment and distinguish among markets. Changes in ratings provide useful market-based feedback to governments about their policies.  And ratings can serve as benchmarks for private companies that want to access international capital markets.  Prior to this initiative, only four Sub-Saharan African countries had received sovereign credit ratings (Botswana, Mauritius, Senegal, and South Africa). This project could add up to 20 countries to this list over the next several years.  To date, ratings have been completed for Lesotho and Gambia.The African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) is another example of support to encourage the private sector. AGOAs purpose is to stimulate closer trade and investment between sub-Saharan Africa and the U.S., thereby boosting market-led growth in the region. AGOAs most important benefit is to provide duty-free treatment for an enhanced list of products plus duty-free imports of textiles and apparel up to a predetermined cap. To qualify, countries must meet requirements with respect to economic reform, trade liberalization, poverty alleviation, attacking corruption, and civil and worker rights.



To date, 38 countries have qualified for AGOA, and total non-oil U.S. imports from AGOA-eligible countries rose to $1.9 billion in 2002 from $1.6 billion in 2000, despite an adverse global economy.  The U.S. is also working to create regional trade hubs in Botswana, Ghana and Kenya and is working to achieve a free trade agreement with the five members of the Southern African Customs Union.



**III. Financial Strengthening**



My third point concerns strengthening financial systems in Africa, including their capacity to manage risk. In most Sub-Saharan countries, SMEs and micro-enterprises have limited access to financial services, yet they make up the vast majority of businesses in Sub-Saharan Africa. In recent years, multilateral development banks, governments, and NGOs have developed numerous programs to finance micro-enterprises. SMEs, on the other hand, would best be served by the local financial sector, which could provide working capital loans and other financial products in local currency. We are convinced that such lending to small and medium businesses has significant potential for generating economic growth and creating jobs and reducing poverty.  All of this would mitigate the overall investment risk climate. If these businesses can grow and demonstrate success, I believe private investment capital will follow.The problem is, however, that this needed financial sector is underdeveloped in many countries.



But we are working to change that. The Bush Administration has long encouraged a small and medium-sized business loan program in Africa. It would be a vital tool for creating economic growth in sub-Saharan Africa. The initiative would mark the first time that the World Bank has combined the resources of its concessional lending arm, the International Development Association (IDA), with those of its private sector affiliate, the International Finance Corporation (IFC).



About eight countries will take part in the $225 million pilot program over the next three to four years, drawing $130 million from new or existing IDA credits, $60 million from IFC, and other commercial investors, and $35 million from other sources. The programs focus will be on three areas:



Access to Financial Servicesestablishment of viable new microfinance institutions, improvement of the ability of local banks to lend profitably, and development of innovative vehicles to supply risk capital to small businesses.



Capacity Building and Business Development Servicesstrengthening of managerial and technical capacity of small businesses by stimulating both demand and supply within the business development market.  The program will also focus on industry-specific programs to link these enterprises with large corporates through integration of supply-chain activities.



Investment Climate and Enabling Environment introduction of reforms that facilitate dialogue between the public and the private sectors and improve the functioning and advocacy role of business associations.



While specific country programs will be unique to each local environment, the Bank will ensure that there will be a regional management structure to ensure the sharing of approaches and instruments, and to provide the overall monitoring and evaluation of the program. In the end, we expect the investment climate will strongly improve, and risk will finally begin to drop as financial services are strengthened.



**Conclusion**Much work lies ahead for donors, development partners, the private sector, and the governments of Africa if we are to assist Africa reduce its high levels of real and perceived investment risk.  The broadening and deepening of financial markets to facilitate financial instruments that mitigate risk is an important element.  However, Africa itself must begin the turnaround. The U.S. is doing and will continue to do what it can to reinforce that effort by emphasizing development effectiveness and working in partnership with African nations that rule justly, invest in people, and promote economic freedom.
