---
title: Statement by Secretary of the Treasury John Snow on the Departure of General Counsel David Aufhauser
date: 2003-09-02
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js691
---
*(Archived Content)*

    

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS



*To view or print the Microsoft Word content on this page, download the free Microsoft Word Viewer. *



JS-691



David Aufhauser has served our nation with superb leadership and vision during a time of great challenge.  As Chairman of the National Security Councils Policy Coordinating Committee on Terrorist Financing, he has helped direct the U.S. governments efforts to halt the flow of money that funds terror.  Since the September 11th attacks, the U.S. has designated more than 290 individuals and entities as terrorists and terrorist supporters and, along with our international partners, has frozen over $136 million in assets worldwide.  Under Davids leadership, new alliances have been forged internationally to fight the financing of terror and more than 80 nations have implemented laws that will help keep money out of the hands of terrorists.



Additionally, David has led Treasurys efforts to secure the nations financial system against money laundering and the financing of terror through implementation of the Patriot Act.  He has also worked to restore integrity and confidence to the financial markets as Treasurys representative on the Justice Departments Corporate Fraud and Abuse Task Force. Finally, he has spearheaded the hunt for assets belonging to the former Iraqi regime and has worked tirelessly to secure their return to Iraq for the good of the Iraqi people. President Bush and I are grateful for his outstanding service to the Treasury Department and to our nation.



**Related Documents:**


- [Letter from David Aufhauser to President Bush](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/letterfromdavid.doc)
