---
title: U.S. Designates 17 Individuals Linked to AL Qaida Designation Supports Actions Taken by Italy and Germany
date: 2003-06-06T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js458
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-458

**WASHINGTON, DC** Highlighting international cooperation in fighting the financing of terror, the U.S. Treasury Department today joined Italy in designating 16 individuals associated with the Algerian based Armed Islamic Group (GIA).  In addition, Treasury designated Abdelghani Mzoudi, a member of the Hamburg, Germany, al Qaida cell that planned the September 11th attacks on America, in support of German action against Mzoudi.  With the support of the United States, Italy and Germany have submitted these names to the United Nations 1267 Committee.

These designations signal continued commitment and momentum within the international community to shut down the funding of terror.  I applaud the Italians and Germans for taking action against these individuals,U.S. Treasury Secretary John Snow stated.

Today's action is one of many the U.S. has taken in collaboration with our international partners.  Most recently, on May 29, the U.S. joined several European countries in designating the al-Aqsa International Foundation, a charity funding Hamas.  In addition to Italy and Germany, we have taken joint actions with Saudi Arabia, Australia, the European Union, the G7, and others.  If there are no objections from the UN 1267 committee, all UN member states will be required to designate these 17 individuals on Tuesday.

A list of those designated is attached.  These designations prohibit transactions between U.S. persons and these individuals and freeze any assets in the United States.  Additional background materials are available by calling Treasury Public Affairs. **INDIVIDUALS DESIGNATED Designated Jointly with the Italian Government ABDAOUI Youssef,** alias Abu ABDULLAH, alias ABDELLAH, alias ABDULLAH. **AKLI Mohamed Amine,** alias Mohamed Amine Akli, alias Killech Shamir (namesalso used in Spain), alias Kali Sami, alias Elias **AMDOUNI Mehrez**, alias FUSCO Fabio, alias HASSAN Mohamed, alias ABU Thale(name used in Spain) **AYARI Chiheb Ben Mohamed**, alias HICHEM Abu Hchem **BAAZAOUI Mondher** alias HAMZA **DUMONT Lionel,** alias BILAL, alias HAMZA, alias BROUGERE Jacques **ESSAADI Moussa Ben Amor,** alias DAH DAH, alias ABDELRAHMMAN, aliasBECHIRFETTAR Rachid, alias Amine del Belgio, alias DjaffarHAMAMI Brahim Ben Hedili **JARRAYA Khalil** alias YARRAYA Khalil, alias ABDELAziz Ben Narvan, alias AMRO, alias OMAR, alias AMROU, alias AMR. **JARRAYA Mounir Ben Habib**, alias YARRAYA. **JENDOUBI Faouzi**, alias SAID, alias SAMIR. **MNASRI Fethi Ben Rebai,** alias AMOR, alias ABU Omar, alias ALIC Fethi **OUAZ Najib RARRBO Ahmed Hosni**, alias ABDALLAH o ADDULLAH **SALEH Nedal**, alias HITEM. **Designated in Support of the German Government Abdelghani Mzoudi** (alternate spelling Mazwati or Mazuti)
