---
title: TREASURY AND IRS ISSUE TREATY LIST FOR NEW REDUCED TAX RATE ON DIVIDENDS
date: 2003-09-30
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js772
---
*(Archived Content)*

    

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS



JS-772



Today, the Treasury Department and the IRS issued a Notice covering the taxation of dividends paid by foreign corporations under the provisions of The Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 (the 2003 Act).  By reducing the rates of tax for individuals on certain dividends, the 2003 Act reduces the double tax on dividends.  The Notice provides guidance on the application of the reduced rates of tax to dividends paid by a foreign corporation.



Dividends paid by a foreign corporation are subject to the reduced tax rates if the corporation is a qualified foreign corporation.  With certain exceptions, a qualified foreign corporationfor this purpose includes a foreign corporation that is eligible for benefits of a U.S. income tax treaty if the treaty meets three requirements.  To qualify, the treaty must be comprehensive, the Secretary must determine it is satisfactory, and it must provide for the exchange of tax information.  The Notice issued today contains the current list of the U.S. tax treaties that meet these three requirements.



Corporations incorporated in one of the countries included in this treaty list must also be eligible for benefits of the U.S. income tax treaty in order to qualify for the reduced tax rates for dividends.  Treasury and the IRS are working on further guidance regarding the eligibility requirements for foreign corporations.



Dividends paid by a foreign corporation also may qualify for the reduced rates of tax under an alternative test based on whether the stock of the corporation is readily tradable on an established U.S. securities market.  Treasury and the IRS will issue guidance relating to this alternative test shortly.

  

**Related Documents:**


- [The text of Notice 2003-69](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/n200369)
