---
title: John B. Taylor Under Secretary of Treasury for International Affairs Keynote Address at the Conference Global Economic Challenges for the IMF’s New Chief American Enterprise Institute New Directions for the International Financial Institutions
date: 2004-06-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1719
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS



js1719



****



I thank the American Enterprise Institute for sponsoring this timely conference and Desmond Lachman for inviting me to speak. It is a pleasure to be on the program with so many distinguished economists--John Lipsky, Glenn Hubbard, Ken Rogoff, Ted Truman, Alan Meltzer--who have contributed so many good ideas to improve the international financial institutions over the years. I have benefited from many discussions with each of them. Indeed, many of their ideas are reflected in our current reform agenda for the international financial institutions.



This seminar is timely, of course, because it comes just two days after Rodrigo Rato took the helm at the IMF. The United States is extremely pleased to welcome Minister Rato. I am confident that his strong and skillful leadership will benefit the IMF and improve the lives of people around the world.



While our main focus today is on the IMF, my opening comments pertain to both Bretton Woods institutions. From their founding sixty years ago, the institutions have been closely linked. It is difficult to discuss change in one without discussing change in the other. Indeed, one of the most important areas of reform is to achieve a better division of labor and to be on the lookout for mission creep that causes overlap and blurred responsibilities.



When the institutions were founded, their original goals were specifically oriented to the period of post World War II reconstruction. At a more general level, however, these goals were timeless, and can be stated quite simply: first, to increase economic stability, and, second, to raise economic growth, and thereby reduce poverty. I see no reason to change these goals. But much has changed in sixty years, and to achieve these goals the institution must reform.



Let me list the many changes in the world economy that have implications for the international financial institutions:

  

•  Private cross-border capital flows have increased sharply and are now much larger than flows from the international financial institutions.



•  A higher fraction of these private capital flows is in the form of securities rather than loans.



•  Remittances from people in developed countries back home have increased dramatically.



•  Markets are more interconnected, which has raised concerns about volatility and contagion.



•  The end of the fixed exchange system reduced the need for balance of payments financing.



•  Better domestic monetary policies have reduced inflation and increased economic stability.



•  Poverty has been reduced significantly, but many countries have been left far behind.



•  New management ideas--results management, timelines, incentives, and accountability--have improved the delivery of services at firms and governments.



Because of these changes, the need for reform has long been recognized, and many good reforms have been proposed and debated for many years. In the last few years, however, I believe that something more significant has happened: we are having success actually implementing reforms. Some of the important changes in the last few years include:



The introduction of collective action clauses in sovereign debt.



•  The creation of clearer limits and criteria for exceptional access from the IMF.



•  A more streamlined conditionality at the IMF.



•  The introduction of a new system for measuring results at the World Bank.



•  Creation of a grant window at the World Bank for very poor countries.



•  A focus on core expertise at the IMF and World Bank with an appropriate division of labor.



Taken as a whole, these reforms represent an important policy shift for both the IMF and the World Bank that is enabling them to achieve their goals more effectively. Let me explain why by referencing the first two reforms on my list.



It is now well known that both the number and severity of financial market crises increased in the 1990s compared with the 1980s. These crises provided clearer and clearer evidence that the systemic changes in the world's financial markets that I just listed required systematic changes in the policy framework underlying the international financial system.



Throughout the 1990s the responses of the international community to crises, though understandable under the circumstances, continued in roughly the same fashion as the response to the first major crisis in Mexico .  They tended to concentrate on short-term tactics rather than strategy.  They were designed around discretionary changes in policy instruments, rather than systematic changes in the policy regime. They tended to be government-focused rather than market-focused, emphasizing large loans by the official sector, and later government-induced bail-ins by the private sector.  Many observers became concerned that the use of very large financial packages was having adverse effects on expectations or incentives.



Missing from the international financial policy framework, however, was more predictability, more accountability, and more systematic behavior on the part of the official sector.  More focus needed to be placed on what public sector actions were likely to be in a given circumstance, on what accountability there would be for those actions, and on what the strategy and the principles behind the actions were.

  

To address these problems a path-breaking G-7 Action Plan was announced in April 2002. The plan called for the use of collective action clauses and the clarification of limits on exceptional access to loans from the IMF.

  

Following the G-7 action plan, the Bush Administration actively promoted inclusion of collective action clauses in external sovereign bonds because we were convinced that they were the most promising and feasible way to introduce more predictability into the system.  These clauses provide a new option for sovereigns to restructure their debt without having to obtain the unanimous consent of bondholders – not to make restructurings more desirable but to make them more predictable and less vulnerable to `holdouts' in cases when a country has no real alternative.



We are very pleased with the dramatic progress that has been made in implementing these proposals in a very short period.  The new clauses are now the market standard in New York and are well on their way to becoming standard in internationally issued sovereign bonds, with no adverse impact on pricing.



Some argue that these clauses do not solve all the problems about the uncertainty surrounding debt restructurings, and they are right. Future crises may not be as closely associated with debt problems as past crises have been. But the clauses and the debate surrounding them last year have helped to change perceptions about emerging market debt.  The debt is now being held by a more diverse class of investors as an important part of their portfolios.

  

Regarding limits and greater clarity on official sector finance, there are several components of the reform effort. First, the Bush administration set out to establish the presumption that the IMF – rather than official creditor governments – is responsible for providing large scale loan financing. This provides an overall budget constraint and thereby an overall limit on loan assistance, recognizing that IMF resources are limited.



Second, we want the IMF to provide clear signals in advance of a decision not to provide additional IMF loans when it appears that the limits of sustainability may be reached in the near future.  Signaling policy changes in advance, even in broad outline, can lead to smoother adjustments and provide investors with time to obtain information about fundamentals – thus minimizing surprises and reducing contagion. At the same time, it is also important to be clear about supporting countries that are following good policies and thereby reduce the risk of investors fleeing one country just because a neighbor may face financial crisis.



Third, to provide specificity and accountability for the changes I have described, the IMF has now established specific criteria for large scale lending above certain limits and adopted the policy that, in cases of exceptional access, management put forward a new*exceptional access report *.  The aim of this report is to provide accountability in the same way that monetary policy reports or inflation reports provide some accountability at central banks.



The purpose of all three changes is to reduce the uncertainty and the perverse disincentives in the markets due to lack of clarity about how much funding will be provided from the IMF and under what circumstances. The clearer limits help define the policy regime under which market participants and borrowing countries can operate. As part of the policy framework defined by the clearer access limits, the general presumption is that the official sector will avoid arm-twisting the private sector to do bail-ins, because this can lead to uncertainty about future applications and encourage early runs for the exits.



I hope that this brief explanation helps show why these two inter-related reforms are important. However, I believe that still more can be done. At the least the recent reforms need to be locked-in and internalized, but, more fundamentally, the reforms also need to be expanded. Now seems to be an opportune time to move ahead. First, the recent progress has generated a momentum for reform and has demonstrated that by working together, the international community can make progress on reforms. Second, we are currently in a period where there is no major financial crisis, which gives the relevant participants time to consider longer-term reforms. Third, there is the occasion of the 60th anniversary of the institutions.



Indeed, at the urging of Secretary Snow, the G7 finance ministers and central bank governors have already begun a strategic review of the institutions. There has already been a positive response to this review from many developed countries, emerging market countries, and developing countries. More consultations are under way, but, in my view, several ideas have already been well received and merit further discussion. For example,



•  An enhanced surveillance system at the IMF, including greater independence between debt sustainability analyses and lending decisions; publication of all country reports; explicit allowance and encouragement of country-led presentations; more focus on contagion by looking at connections between countries.



•  A new non-borrowing program at the IMF with emphasis on strong country ownership of program design.



These, of course, are just examples, suggestive of the types of additional reforms that are possible. I very much look forward to working with Managing Director Rato and the entire international community on these and other types of reforms in the years ahead.
