---
title: Under Secretary Taylor Remarks at Wharton Finance Conference
date: 2004-10-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2012
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

js-2012

*Bullish News about the World Economy **John B. Taylor Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs Written Version of Keynote Address Presented at the Annual Wharton Finance Conference Global Finance: Unleashing the Bull** Wyndam Hotel  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania October 8, 2004*

Thank you for inviting me to speak here today.  It is a pleasure to be here inPhiladelphia and to participate in this discussion on the global economy with students, industry professionals, and finance scholars. The conference theme Global Finance: Unleashing the Bull couldn't be more topical, for a bullish assessment of the global economy is exactly what the facts tell us today.

I am going to let the facts speak for themselves tonight.  First, let's start right here at Wharton.  I hear that the number of firms coming to interview at Wharton is way up this year, compared to last year.  That is good news for the students in the audience, but it is just one of many signs of significantly improving conditions in job markets in the United States.  Data showing improvements in the job market for the country as a whole were announced this morning. They show that the U. S. economy is continuing to grow.  Estimated job creation was revised upward by more than 200,000 jobs through August, and with September's increase of another 96,000 jobs, we have 1.9 million jobs created since August of last year.  Most economists now estimate that economic growth in the third quarter will turn out to be at least as great as the 3.3 percent in the second quarter.

And the global economy is strong too. TheInternational Monetary Fund's most recent estimate of global growth for this year is higher than it has been in three decades!  And this good global economy is good news for the United States economy because it means that the growth in exports, in jobs, and in incomes for Americans will be more certain and lasting.

But there is much more.  This year there are no major financial crises in the world to talk about.  This is in striking contrast to the 1990s when one financial crisis after another brought high interest rates and soaring unemployment to the economies ofLatin America, Asia, and Russia.

A related favorable development is that contagion of financial crises across countries, which was discussed so much by market analysts in the 1990s, also seems to have disappeared from the scene. It was in 1998 that the default onRussia's debt caused financial storms as far away as Africa, Latin America, and East Asia. In the more recent Argentina default in 1998 there was no contagion beyond Uruguay, just next door.

And there is no major economy in recession. The only recession that I heard about recently was the recession in the crisis expert business. One expert jokingly asked if I could do something about it.

Most economies in the world are now growing at a healthy goldi-locks pace--neither too fast, nor too slow--suggesting that global economic growth will continue.  TheUnited States is expanding at a sustainable pace--for the third year in a row.  The second largest economy in the world, Japan, has also been growing nicely, in contrast to its lost decade of the 1990s. China's rapid growth earlier in the year has slowed to a more sustainable pace, and the rest of Asia is again doing well after last year's SARS scare. In Latin America, growth has picked up in Mexico, Columbia, Peru, Chile, Brazil, and Argentina.  Latin America grew at over 5 percent so far this year. Russia and most of the European economies are also growing strong. Even the French and German economies have shown signs of growth this summer.

Yet another favorable development is that interest rate spreads between emerging market bonds and U.S. Treasuries are at historically low levels.  The spreads are important measures of global risk.  Spreads have come down markedly during the last two years.  They have stayed down despite the forecasts early this year that spreads would rise sharply throughout the year as monetary tightening in the United States began.

Another measure of risk--volatility in financial markets--is also low. You can clearly detect this by looking at the implied volatility in the options price formula that you have been studying at Wharton, but ask traders and they will tell you about it.

One of the most auspicious developments in the world economy is that there are no major inflation scares.  Inflation is low and stable in the United States and Europe, and the persistent deflation in Japan is past its low point and price stability is expected soon. That inflation is low in emerging markets is especially significant.  The average inflation rate in emerging markets was 65 percent in the mid 1990s.  Now it is less than one-tenth of that. That benign inflation environment in the United States and other large economies is more evidence that the global economic expansion should continue.

The one element of risk we clearly see today is the high price of oil. West Texas Intermediate closed at $52.58 per barrel today. Those higher prices are a drag on economic growth, but the global economy is strong and the expansion in the United States can withstand such shocks.  But such risks are a reminder that we cannot be complacent, despite the otherwise excellent economic situation.

Why are economic times so good?  In my view, a big part of the answer can be found in improved economic policies, whether in the United States, Japan, Brazil, Turkey, or elsewhere.  The United States economy is growing--despite the setback of the downturn starting in 2000, the 9/11 terrorist attacks, and the corporate scandals--because of the timely response of monetary and fiscal policy, especially President Bush's tax cuts of 2001 and 2003. The Japanese economy is growing because Prime Minister Koizumi insisted on fundamental change, and monetary growth was increased and non-performing loans were reduced.  Improved economic relations between the United States and Japan--led by President Bush and Prime Minister Koizumi--had a lot to do with these changes.

Similar explanations hold for other good performances, including the high growth, declining inflation, low spreads under President Lula in Brazil and Prime Minister Erdogan in Turkey, two countries that had been plagued by crisis at the start of the Bush Administration.  As withJapan, support by the United States for these allies and their economic policies has been important. The path breaking Agenda for Growth with the G7 and the new Group for Growth with Brazil has reinforced and supported pro-growth policies by sharing experiences and knowledge.

What about the decline of crises and risk spreads and volatility?  One reason they are down is because of the more credible focus on price stability by central banks--aided by market-determined flexible exchange rates--which has largely ended the boom-bust cycle in many countries and is now laying the foundation for what may be the longest global boom we have ever seen.  This trend began with the Federal Reserve years ago but has spread around the world in more recent years.

In addition, the international financial institutions have begun to reform, following calls by the Bush Administration joined by many of our allies. Important reforms include greater clarity and predictability in the use of large-scale financing from theInternational Monetary Fund, the use of collective action clauses in emerging market debt, and the movement toward grants rather than loans at the World Bank. Such reforms themselves--while still very recent in their implementation--improve confidence, showing that international financial officials can work to make needed changes in the international financial system. Greater transparency at central banks and governments has also helped to reduce contagion by enabling market analysts to better discriminate between countries that follow good policies and those that do not.

I suspect that some of you may find the bullish situation I am describing here tonight a bit surprising.  One reason may be that you do not read much about in the press.  Most journalists I talk to agree that the global economic situation is indeed unusually good, but few think it is news worthy enough to write about.  One reason is simply that it is good news, not bad news.  As one of the journalists told me, We won a prize for our coverage of the terrible Russian financial crises in 1998. There is no way we could win a journalism prize for covering the current good state of the world economy.  I'm not going to cover it. I'd be surprised if anyone here covers it.

The recent cover of the*Economist*magazine illustrates this point well. The cover story described world economic facts that are not much different from the facts I just described.  After all, we look at the same facts.  But the headline on the magazine cover was Scares Ahead for the World Economy, perhaps more sensational, but certainly less descriptive of the facts than the title of my remarks tonight.
