---
title: Secretary Snow to Visit Lancaster, Pennsylvania on Tuesday to Discuss U.S. Economy
date: 2004-10-15
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2036
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary John W. Snow will visit the Lancaster , Pennsylvania area on Tuesday, October 19 to meet with local business leaders and students to discuss the President's efforts to strengthen the economy and create jobs.

As a result of the President's economic leadership, we have overcome a recession and seen 13 straight months of job creation, totaling more than 1.9 million new U.S. jobs since August 2003, said Secretary Snow.  Pennsylvania has gained new jobs this year, and the President's tax reform policies have ensured that more than 4.6 million Pennsylvania taxpayers will have lower income tax bills in 2004.

During this trip to Pennsylvania , Secretary Snow also will discuss the Administration's efforts to control health care costs, reduce frivolous lawsuits and ensure that America has reliable and affordable sources of energy.  While the economy is on solid footing, we are not satisfied and there is still more work to be done.  We need to continue to push for pro-growth policies that will create jobs and raise standards of living, Secretary Snow said.

Recent indicators show that President Bush's economic policies continue to move the economy forward. According to the Labor Department, the national unemployment rate was 5.4% in September – down 0.9 percentage point from a peak of 6.3% in June 2003 and the lowest rate since October 2001. At 5.4%, the unemployment rate is below the average of the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. Employment over the last year was up in 47 of the 50 states and the unemployment rate was down in all regions and in 45 of the 50 states.

The following events are open to the media, which must present media credentials or photo ID:

**Tuesday, October 19  Roundtable with Local Business Leaders, with U.S. Congressman Joe Pitts**10:00 a.m. EDTLancaster General Health Campus2100 Harrisburg PikeLancaster , PA**Media should arrive by 9:30 a.m.**Tour of Sechan Electronics, Inc. and Roundtable Discussion**2:00 p.m. EDTSechan Electronics, Inc.525 Furnace Hills PikeLititz , PA**Media should arrive by 1:30 pm**There will be a brief media availability immediately following the event
