---
title: 'Aid to Social Security Beneficiaries: Florida Banks Respond to Secretary Snow''s Call'
date: 2004-09-02
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1880
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS



js-1880

  

Due to the imminent approach of Hurricane Frances toward Florida, the Treasury Department, in cooperation with the Florida Bankers Association, has requested that Florida banks make available today September social security benefit payments that are currently scheduled for direct deposit on Friday, September 3. Several Florida financial institutions have responded to the request and have agreed to recognize these social security benefit payments today.



I thank these financial institutions for their efforts to aid Florida's citizens in this time of need, and I commend them for the compassion they've demonstrated for their neighbors and communities, said Treasury Secretary John W. Snow.



The Florida Bankers Association sent a survey to its members and all members who responded indicated they would honor social security payments today and assist those citizens preparing for the storm.



Florida banks are standing by to help people who are in the path of Hurricane Frances, said FBA CEO Alex Sanchez. Bankers know the importance of planning and being prepared and our members are ready to help their customers and communities.



The response to the Treasury Secretary's request has been positive and overwhelming. Nevertheless, bank customers should check with their financial institution before visiting it today to confirm that they are providing this customer service.



This customer service will apply to customers of participating banks who have already arranged for their social security benefits to be made by direct deposit. This announcement does not apply to beneficiaries who receive their benefit payments through the mail.



-30-
