---
title: Statement By John B. Taylor Under Secretary For International Affairs U.S. Department of The Treasury La Paz, Bolivia September 3, 2004
date: 2004-09-03T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1899
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

js-1899

 

I am very pleased to be here in La Paz. Bolivia has been an important foreign policy focus of the Bush Administration and my office at the U.S. Treasury, in particular. The purpose of my trip is to discuss ways in which the United States can continue to assist the Bolivian people in their efforts to create jobs, raise living standards, and reduce poverty in Bolivia.

During my visit I have met with President Mesa, Ministers Jose Galindo, Horst Grebe, Javier Cuevas and Guillermo Torres, and Central Bank President Juan Antonio Morales. I will also meet with Superintendent of Banks Fernando Calvo and Congressional leaders, as well as representatives of Bolivia's private sector. I commended President Mesa and his team on their policies to support economic growth and job creation and to strengthen government finances.

I will be visiting BancoSol, which is an important provider of loans and other services to entrepreneurs in El Alto. The activities of institutions like BancoSol are essential for promoting economic growth and entrepreneurship within the poorest communities. This is why, at the Special Summit of Americas in Monterrey earlier this year, the United States and other countries proposed a new initiative to triple credit for small businesses in Latin America through Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) programs.

We want Bolivia to be a leader for the whole region in the area of small business lending and I am pleased to announce today that Bolivia will be the beneficiary of the first IDB program associated with this path-breaking Summit of the Americas initiative. We are looking forward to a $4 million IDB project that will enable Caja los Andes to greatly expand lending to small entrepreneurs. The project will also help Caja los Andes strengthen its infrastructure to receive remittances from Bolivians living abroad. These funds totaled $340 million in 2003 and are a critical source of income for many Bolivians.

I am also happy to announce that the U.S. Treasury will be dispatching a technical assessment mission to offer assistance to Bolivia's finance ministry in the area of government debt issuance and management. This is the third U.S. Treasury technical assistance team to visit Bolivia in the past year. The next step will be to deploy a permanent resident advisor.

Finally, I am pleased to announce that a delegation from the U.S. will be visiting Bolivia soon to assist the government in developing a proposal for Millennium Challenge Account assistance. The MCA--proposed by President Bush and passed by Congress earlier this year-- is designed to support countries that are implementing pro-growth policies. Bolivia is one of only 16 countries that have been designated as eligible for MCA funds. I look forward to Bolivia's submission of a concrete and measurable proposal for MCA assistance.
