---
title: Treasury Appoints Ira L. Hobbs to Chief Information Officer Post
date: 2004-05-27
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1694
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS



JS-1694

  

The Treasury Department today announced the appointment of Ira L. Hobbs as the Department’s Chief Information Officer. Hobbs comes to Treasury from the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) where he has served as the Deputy Chief Information Officer for the past seven years. The appointment is effective June 13, 2004.



Hobbs has an extensive background in federal policy development and information technology (IT) program management, including a 22-year career at USDA. He has worked with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and the Federal CIO Council on multiple e-government initiatives and policy formulation. He has championed a myriad of cross-government initiatives to improve business processes and implement best practices. Since 1999, he has co-chaired the Federal CIO Council’s Workforce and Human Capital for IT Committee.



Among his many accomplishments, Hobbs commissioned the National Academy of Public Administrators (NAPA) to study the state of the federal IT workforce. Once completed, he worked with OMB, the Office of Personnel Management, the Federal CIO Council and Congress to build a broad coalition of support for implementing the significant changes recommended by NAPA, which included changes in laws and regulations. He has a demonstrated track record of working collaboratively with others, setting a clear vision for the future and being a catalyst for change.



Hobbs has a B.A. in political science from Florida A&M University and a Master of Public Administration from Florida State University.



The Chief Information Officer (CIO) serves as the principal advisor on IT issues to the Secretary of the Treasury, the Deputy Secretary, and other senior management throughout the Department. The primary role of the CIO is to acquire and manage information resources and includes providing broad leadership in planning, budgeting, acquiring, and managing Departmental and bureau IT resources.



The CIO also formulates policies and programs to maximize the value of IT investments and manage investment risks across the Department. In partnership with the CIO Council, the CIO ensures that Department-wide and enterprise-wide corporate systems development, integration, and operational and security issues are addressed. The CIO represents Treasury’s IT interests with external stakeholders, including other federal agencies, Congress and private and corporate entities.
