---
title:  Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Presents Treasury Certificate of Recognition to Financial Education Program in Des Moines
date: 2004-09-27
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1958
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1958

 

Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. today presented Treasury's John Sherman Award for Excellence to the Iowa Homeless Youth Centers for its Money Matters on the Street financial education program in Des Moines. Iannicola toured the center's facilities and met with some of its clients.

Iannicola thanked and congratulated the staff for its commitment to helping improve the lives of the clients they serve. He also highlighted the importance of their work in teaching basic personal finance skills that can help them transition into a better quality of life.

"The center meets its clients' immediate needs by providing them with the basic necessities of food and shelter," Iannicola continued. "But it goes even further. Through its Money Matters on the Street program, the center helps its young clients help themselves by equipping them with important life skills, like how to manage money and how to use basic financial tools. Treasury commends the Homeless Youth Centers for helping change so many lives through education."

Iowa Homeless Youth Centers is a non-profit organization that works to eliminate homelessness among youth and young mothers in Polk County, Iowa. The center incorporates financial education in each of its street outreach, transitional living sites and independent living programs to homeless youths ranging in ages 16 to 21 that have exhausted family and community resources.

The John Sherman Award for Excellence in Financial Education presented to the center today, has been awarded to organizations around the country in recognition of outstanding financial education programs. The award, which is named after the 32nd Treasury Secretary, serves to raise awareness for exemplary financial education programs. Additional information on the award can be found at: www.treasury.gov/offices/domestic-finance/financial-institution/fin-education/recognition_awards.shtml.

While in Iowa, Iannicola also delivered remarks at the Iowa State University Extension's annual conference about the importance of financial education to help those in financial need.

Iannicola addressed members of the National Extension Association of Family and Consumer Sciences who provide education on the topic of financial management. He shared information about federal financial education resources and how financial education can help those in need. The conference is part of the Cooperative Extension program, a nationwide educational program sponsored by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, state governments through land-grant universities, and county governments. ISU Extension builds partnerships and provides research-based learning opportunities to improve quality of life in Iowa. Its programs include Money for Life, a financial education program for adults and children.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education. Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning. The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States. For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).

 

-30-
