---
title: Jose Fourquet, United States Executive Director, Resignation Announcement
date: 2004-04-12T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1318
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free Adobe® Acrobat® Reader®. *

js-1318

Treasury Secretary Snow Praises Jose A. Fourquet, U.S. Executive Director of the Inter-American Development Bank, for Leadership and Accomplishments While Serving in Bush Administration

Treasury Secretary John W. Snow today praised the leadership and accomplishments of Jose A. Fourquet, U.S. Executive Director of the Inter-American Development Bank, for his service to the Bush Administration. President George W. Bush nominated Mr. Jose A. Fourquet and the U.S. Senate unanimously confirmed him as the 12th United States Executive Director of the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). A native of Puerto Rico, Mr. Fourquet assumed his duties on December 14th, 2001, becoming the youngest person ever to hold this position. Today he submitted his resignation to the President, effective May 3, 2004. (See attached letter.)

We will miss Jose Fourquet's insight and leadership at the Inter-American Development Bank, said Treasury Secretary John Snow. Jose worked every day with great skill and diplomacy to advance President Bush's mission to improve living standards for people throughout the Americas. The IDB is a stronger, more effective institution today because of Jose's contributions. I couldn't be more proud of the work he did and I am thankful for his advice and counsel. I wish the best for Jose and his family as they move on to new challenges.

At the IDB, Mr. Fourquet's work was particularly notable for focusing attention on improving the process for measuring success in IDB operations and for seeking ways to increase private sector investment in the region.

Prior to joining the Bush Administration, Mr. Fourquet was a Vice-President in the Fixed Income, Currency & Commodities Division of Goldman, Sachs & Co. in New York. For the majority of his time at Goldman Sachs, Mr. Fourquet worked as an institutional salesperson in the Emerging Debt Markets Group. It was in that role that Mr. Fourquet developed significant expertise in the emerging capital markets, especially those in Latin America.

Mr. Fourquet previously worked for six years as an Operations Officer with the Central Intelligence Agency. In that capacity, Mr. Fourquet was posted abroad in Latin America and the Caribbean where he collected, evaluated and reported high-priority intelligence of interest to U.S. policy makers.

A member of the Council on Foreign Relations, Mr. Fourquet has received numerous awards for his community involvement. Hispanic Business Magazine has recognized Mr. Fourquet as one of America's 100 Most Influential Hispanics in 2001 and 2002. The Switzerland-based World Economic Forum has also selected Mr. Fourquet as one of the 100 Global Leaders for Tomorrow for the year 2003.

Mr. Fourquet graduated from Georgetown University with a BA in Government and a School of Foreign Service Special Certificate in Latin American Studies. He also obtained an MBA in Finance from Columbia Business School where he was inducted into the Beta Gamma Sigma honor society.

-30-

 

**REPORTS**

- [Resignation Letter of Jose A. Fourquet](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/fourquetidb_resignationltr.pdf)
