---
title: Treasury Official Participates in Financial Education Panel in New Mexico
date: 2004-09-13
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1909
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1909

 

Sandra Pedroarias, Director of Outreach for Treasury's Office of Financial Education, today participated as a panelist in the National Credit Union Administration's*Access Across America Empowerment Summit*in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Pedroarias described Treasury's efforts to improve financial literacy across the country and discussed federal financial education resources available to credit unions. Pedroarias addressed how credit unions can design their financial education programs to better serve their members.

Credit unions have long been known for offering consumer oriented financial services, and financial education can be one of the most valuable services they offer their members, said Pedroarias. On behalf of the Department of the Treasury, I want to commend the National Credit Union Administration for hosting these*Access Across America Summits*because they help draw attention to America's need for financial education and the essential role that financial institutions can play.

  *Access Across America was established to create economic empowerment and facilitate the extension of affordable financial services to individuals and communities across America. This initiative was founded on the principle that government should empower people toward their personal financial objectives. The Summit's main goal is to provide credit unions with resources, technical assistance and economic development opportunities by developing partnerships with federal agencies. The National Credit Union Administration is one of the twenty federal agencies that comprise the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, which was created by Title V of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act and signed into law by President Bush in December of 2003. *was established to create economic empowerment and facilitate the extension of affordable financial services to individuals and communities across America. This initiative was founded on the principle that government should empower people toward their personal financial objectives. The Summit's main goal is to provide credit unions with resources, technical assistance and economic development opportunities by developing partnerships with federal agencies. The National Credit Union Administration is one of the twenty federal agencies that comprise the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, which was created by Title V of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act and signed into law by President Bush in December of 2003.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education. Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, homeownership, and retirement planning. The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).
