---
title: U.S. Treasury Official Salutes the National Academy Foundation’s Promotion of Financial Education in the Classroom and Careers in the Financial Services Industry
date: 2004-07-20T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1802
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

js-1802

 

Today, as part of the National Academy Foundation (NAF)'s 2004 Institute for Staff Development, Edward Christovich, Director of Treasury's Office ofFinancial Education, saluted NAF for its role in promoting financial education in the classroom, and moderated a financial services industry panel at the New York Marriot Marquis inNew York City.  Participants in the panel represented professional development organizations, private financial services providers, and federal regulatory entities.  The audience was comprised of about 400AcademyofFinancedirectors and teachers.

The NAF's Institute for Staff Development features several days of intensive peer training, industry presentations, and networking opportunities, with the goal of ensuring that Academy programs are successful, focused on the improvement of public education, and dedicated toward helping young people continue their education as a step toward building careers.

Christovich commended the NAF for providing teachers with opportunities to obtain additional tools to further enhance financial education in the classroom, and for bringing together financial industry experts to share their perspective on the importance of financial education with educators.  Christovich also advised teachers on how to teach financial education effectively. I applaud teachers for their commitment to prepare our children to become competent and informed individuals, and for providing them with financial education, an essential tool to make a hope a reality, said Christovich.

The mission of the NAF is to sustain a national network of career academies to support the development ofAmerica's youth toward personal and professional success -from high school to higher education, and throughout their careers.  NAF Academies represent business/school partnerships that prepare young people through a combination of school-based curricula and work-based experiences.  NAF operates Academies in three career themes:  finance, travel and tourism, and information technology.  Each Academy operates as a school within a school in high schools and is located in more than 275 high schools nationwide.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office ofFinancial Education(Office) in May 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership, and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office ofFinancial Educationvisit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).
