---
title: Treasury Officials Support Financial Literacy Efforts in Washington, DC Neighborhood
date: 2004-12-15T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2158
---
*(Archived Content)*

js-2158

**Treasury Officials Support Financial Literacy Efforts in Washington, DC Neighborhood ** Under Secretary Brian Roseboro and Deputy Assistant Secretary Dan Iannicola today met with representatives of Operation Hope to discuss progress on bringing financial literacy to the inner city. The roundtable discussion brought together Operation Hope sponsors, supporters and community leaders to discuss financial literacy in general and the newest Hope Center scheduled to open in early 2005. The Hope Center model offers financial literacy and economic education, as well as hands-on financial case management and wealth building through homeownership and small business ownership.

Under Secretary Roseboro highlighted the organization's commitment to improving financial education in urban communities. Operation Hope brings together expertise and passion to get results in urban America, said Roseboro.

Deputy Assistant Secretary Dan Iannicola recognized the new center's sponsors and supporters' commitment to improving financial education, as well as E*TRADE Bank's multi-year commitment to serve as the signature sponsor for Hope Center Anacostia in the Washington D.C. metro area. The involvement of E*TRADE bank in establishing this center for the people of Anacostia shows the positive impact members of the lending community can have on financial literacy.

Operation HOPE is a national provider of financial literacy and economic empowerment programs. Through ongoing collaborations and long-term partnerships with leading government, private sector, and community interests, Operation HOPE works to bring self-sufficiency and a sustained spirit of revitalization to America's inner-city communities.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education. Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning. The office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States. For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).

-30-
