---
title: Treasury Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions, Wayne A. Abernathy Leads Florida Roundtable to Discuss Financial Education with Local Leaders in Orlando
date: 2004-08-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1851
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1851

   

Treasury Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions Wayne Abernathy today led a financial education roundtable, hosted by the InCharge Education Foundation in Orlando, Florida.  Abernathy highlighted Treasury's financial education initiatives and the role of the new Financial Literacy and Education Commission established by Title V of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act.  Abernathy and over 15 participants representing Orlando businesses, nonprofits, the academic community and local government also discussed how to improve financial education in Orlando and the country.

Businesses, schools and local leaders play a key role in improving financial education in their communities.  By continuing to work together and identifying best practices for financial education, communities can help people enjoy the benefits of acquiring good personal finance skills, said Abernathy.  By helping to coordinate this important effort, groups like the InCharge Education Foundation improve access to financial education.

The InCharge Education Foundation is a national non-profit organization that specializes in personal finance education and research.  The organization promotes financial education through various programs including: Credit Compass, MindYourFinances.com and dinerohispano.com.  It publishes the YOUNG MONEY and Military Money magazines, as well as produces the Mike Schiano radio program.

In addition to InCharge Education Foundation staff, over 15 representatives from the private, nonprofit, academic and local government sectors also participated in the forum.  The following organizations participated at today's roundtable:  Employer Services, Workforce Central Florida; Smith Barney; the University of Kentucky; Hispanic Business Initiative Fund of Greater Orlando; Virginia Tech; Florida Credit Union League - Central Florida Chapter; CCCS of Central Florida & the Florida Gulf Coast; InCharge Debt Solutions; Central Florida Educators' Federal Credit Union; Colonial Bank; Valencia Community College; Central Florida Educators' Federal Credit Union; UCF Federal Credit Union; Center for Economic Education, University of Central Florida; Instruction and Curriculum Services, Orange County Public Schools; and Junior Achievement of Central Florida.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, homeownership and retirement planning.  The office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).
