---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Delivers Remarks at National Foundation for Credit Counseling Conference in Orlando
date: 2004-09-20T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1947
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

js-1947

 

Treasury's Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola Jr. today delivered remarks to an audience of over 200 credit counselors from across the country at the National Foundation for Credit Counseling's Annual Leaders Conference in Orlando, Florida.  Iannicola discussed Treasury's financial education initiatives and how the credit counseling industry can help educate individuals to make wiser decisions about managing their finances.

Iannicola told the audience about free federal financial education resources available to them, gave the group advice on program design and answered attendees' questions.  He concluded by encouraging the participants to continue their use of financial education in their attempts to change their clients behavior. Finally, Iannicola encouraged the group to respond to Treasury's request for public comment, which can be found at the Office of Financial Education's web page at:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education)under the public comment link.

Iannicola also commended credit counselors for the work they do in helping those in financial trouble make a fresh start.  Through your time and talents you better the lives of your clients on a daily basis, said Iannicola.  You offer the hand of comfort, the face of compassion and the voice of calm in financially troubled lives.

Founded in 1951, the National Credit Counseling Foundation, also known as the Consumer Credit Counseling Service, sets the national standard for quality credit counseling, debt reduction services and education for financial wellness.  The organization has more than one thousand community-based agency offices across the country, assisting over 1.5 million households annually.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).

-30-
