---
title: New Directions for U.S. Economic Policy towards Japan and China John B. Taylor Under Secretary for International Affairs United States Treasury Deer Creek Club St. Louis, Missouri
date: 2004-10-21
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2050
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2050

It is a pleasure to be here tonight in St. Louis.  The last time I spoke in St. Louis--just two weeks ago--the Cardinals won game 2 of the National League Division Series.  Tonight it's game 7 of the National League Championship Series. I hope my visit here works again for the Cardinals.

Of course the real reason I'm here tonight is not to discuss baseball, but rather to discuss another topic of great importance to the people of St. Louis--economic policy.

My specific topic is economic relations between the United States--the largest economy in the world, and China and Japan, the second and third largest economies in the world, at least when you rank economies by purchasing power. Clearly the economies of China and Japan matter greatly for the United States and the world economy.  The United States, China, and Japan account for over 40 percent of the world's GDP.  China and Japan are the two largest trading partners of the United States, excluding our immediate neighbors, Canada and Mexico.

And you can see the economic importance of China and Japan right here in Missouri: Exports from Missouri to Japan increased by 35 percent in 2003 and exports from Missouri to China have increased by 100 percent.  During the last three years, exports from Missouri have increased by an amazing 243 percent and 56 percent to China and Japan respectively.

So getting these two economic relationships right has been a high priority of the Bush Administration, and in fact these relationships have changed directions in important ways under President Bush's leadership, as suggested by these amazing trade statistics.  I want to focus on these new directions tonight.

** Japan**Let me begin by recalling the economic situation in Japan at the start of the Bush Administration, three and a half years ago.  Growth in Japan was near zero, much as it had been for the previous ten years a period many economists called the lost decade in Japan.  Moreover, Japan was experiencing a deflation that had persisted for more than six years.  The deflation was holding back economic growth because consumers and businesses curtailed their spending plans, anticipating lower prices in the future.  The deflation and lack of growth made it difficult for people to service their loans, so non-performing loans at banks were growing and threatening the banking system.

A Japan in economic stagnation was clearly not in the interests of the United States.  Japan is an important ally.  Stronger economic growth would benefit the United States and the world.  Stronger growth would provide the resources to help Japan play a key role with the United States and other allies in providing security and development assistance.

So, the lagging economy in Japan was a problem that President Bush and his Administration wanted to help the Japanese solve.  After years of stagnation, President Bush decided a new approach was needed. Two developments presented an opportunity for a change in direction.  First, Prime Minister Koizumi was elected to the top leadership position in Japan.  Second, the Bank of Japan announced that it would follow a new type of monetary policy called quantitative easing.  This announcement showed a willingness in Japan to take a fresh approach to the economic stagnation problem.

Presented with these opportunities, President Bush and his team developed a new approach for our economic relations with Japan. There were three key principles.

First, there would be no Japan bashing. The President wanted our economic relations with Japan to be based on mutual respect and cooperation, not antagonism.  Lecturing by the United States government had proven to be an unhelpful way of advancing prosperity in Japan.  The title of a 1999 Brookings book Troubled Times: U.S.-Japan Trade Relations in the 1990s captured the problematic nature of the relation.  The President called for a very free and frank exchange of views, but not lecturing one's friend.

Second, the Bush Administration emphasized monetary policy as the key way to overcome deflation rather than additional short-term fiscal stimulus boosts which had not sustained growth.  We also focused on ways to address Japan's non-performing loan problems, which were closely related to the deflation.

Third, we concentrated on structural, or supply side, obstacles to achieving stronger long-term productivity growth, not on short-term solutions.  This longer-term focus on issues such as de-regulation and entrepreneurship would make us more effective in working together with the Japanese authorities on ways to strengthen their economy and ours.

With these three principles in hand, work on implementation began.When President Bush met with Prime Minister Koizumi in Camp David in June 2001, they began to talk about these economic issues including the non-performing loan problem in Japan.  President Bush supported the Prime Minister's reforms, saying to the press afterwards that: ''I have no reservations about the economic reform agenda that the Prime Minister is advancing. He talks about tackling difficult issues that some leaders in the past refused to address.'' Their friendship and mutual respect--which set the tone for discussions at all levels--was symbolized by the frequent reference to the Prime Minister's favorite movie, High Noon, and how it reminded him of President Bush's strong determination and economic leadership.

At that Camp David meeting, the two leaders also announced the launch of a new bilateral economic initiative called the U.S.-Japan Economic Partnership for Growth. I recall the first senior official meeting under that new partnership in my Treasury office with our counterparts from Japan in October 2001.  We discussed these issues as well as what actions the U.S. was taking to raise growth, in particular President Bush's then recently enacted tax cuts.  There were many other meetings in the months and years that followed, including several in Japan.  In each of these meetings and in public speeches, we stressed the three principles underlying our new approach.

I am very happy to say that this new approach has worked.  We have tangible results.  Economic growth in Japan has returned.  Experts say it is more sustainable than they have seen in a dozen years.  Deflation is receding.  And all these successes have followed the needed policy changes: increased growth of the money supply and reduction of non-performing loans.  And our Ambassador to Japan, Howard Baker, reports that relations between the United States and Japan have never been better.

To be specific about the economy, economic growth of 3.5 percent per year since the beginning of 2002 make this the strongest recovery in Japan since the bubble burst.  Although risks remain, there are reasons for optimism that Japan's current recovery will prove more durable than the abortive recoveries of 1995-96 and 1999-2000.  First, growth has been led by private demand, not artificially boosted by government spending.   In addition, deflation has eased, with core consumer prices falling only 0.2 percent year-on-year in the most recent month after posting 0.8 percent declines just last year.

Japan's progress in cleaning up its banking sector will also sustain growth.  The major banks are on track to cut reported non-performing loans in half to meet the government target of 4 percent of total loans by March 2005.   And, after steady deterioration during most of the 1990s Japanese firms have made real progress in reducing their debt and improving profitability.  Japanese corporations have raised profit margins and return-on-assets by more than half since late 1998.

The challenge for Japan now is to raise its potential growth rate from the current estimate of about 1percent per year, to deal with its rapidly aging society and its fiscal problems. Japan's fiscal deficit, at 8 percent of GDP, and debt stock, at 166 percent, are the largest relative to output of any G-7 country.

Prime Minister Koizumi's current top reform priority is privatizing the postal system, which includes the world's two largest financial institutions Japan's Postal Savings and Postal Life Insurance systems.  A successful privatization has the potential to vastly improve efficiency in Japan's financial markets.   It also could drastically reshape the competitive environment in Japan.

With the Bush Administration's new approach to Japan, we are also seeing other results:

There is a new U.S.-Japan tax treaty, which will help facilitate U.S. investment in Japan.  There is far greater acceptance of foreign direct investment today than just a few years ago, as Japan's people came to recognize the benefits from the capital and skills that foreign firms offer.  Foreigners now hold major equity stakes and play management roles in Japanese auto manufacturers like Nissan, Mazda, and Subaru.  Foreign firms now control roughly 20 percent of Japan's life insurance market, and account for more than 30 percent of trading volume on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.

And you can see the new openness of Japan's economy wherever you go in Japan.  I visited a new retail outlet Don Quijote's during my most recent trip to Japan in May.  The store, in downtown Tokyo, sells imported consumer goods ranging from televisions, to clothing, to sporting goods.  I remember trying on a baseball glove and noting that the price was roughly the same as I'd pay at the Sports Authority or another U.S. store.  That almost never would have been the case 10 years ago, when Japanese consumers routinely flew to Hawaii, not to enjoy the beaches but to go shopping.

This new direction for U.S.-Japan economic relations does not, of course, mean the end of all trade disputes or other frictions, but I believe the shared interest in a stronger, more vibrant Japanese economy will continue to shape U.S. economic policy towards Japan.

**  China**China's emergence as a major economy and trading partner is now so well known that it's hard to remember the autarkic country of a generation ago.  During the 25 years since China decided to move toward a market economy, the Chinese economy has grown by 9percent per year.  Now, as I previously mentioned, China is the second largest economy in the world and is a major contributor to world growth; in fact, in the last three years, the United States and China accounted for half of global growth. And exports from the United States to China are growing rapidly.

Yet, more imports from China have led to difficult adjustments and to complaints about Chinese trade practices.  Most recently, groups in industry and Congress have focused on China's exchange rate, which has remained essentially unchanged since 1995.  Some have called for increased trade barriers and economic isolationism.

To deal with these problems the Bush Administration decided early on to work with the Chinese to open further their markets and to move to a market-based flexible exchange rate. The entry of China into the WTO in 2001 presented the opportunity to change directions. As President Bush recently said, summarizing this approach, The tendency in American politics is to fall prey to economic isolationism.  That would be bad for our workers. It would be bad for our consumers....So I'm saying to places like China, you treat us the way we treat you. You open up your markets just like we open up our markets. And I say that with confidence because we can compete with anybody, any time, anywhere so long as the rules are fair.

To implement this approach in the difficult and highly technical case of the exchange rate, the Administration decided that our economic relationship with China should feature candid senior-level discussions, multilateral support from other countries, and technical engagement. We emphasized the harm that disruptive trade actions could bring.  We stressed that a flexible exchange rate would be good not only for the United States but also for China and the rest of the world. We showed that a flexible exchange rate would better enable China to conduct monetary policy and thereby contain inflation and avoid overheating. We argued that a market-based exchange rate would reduce concerns about exchange rate manipulation and unfair valuations.

Based on these principles, the Administration formulated and implemented a financial diplomacy strategy consisting of three parts.

First, the Administration initiated an unprecedented level of engagement between senior American and Chinese leadership, urging them to move more rapidly to a flexible, market-based exchange rate. President Bush, Vice President Cheney, Secretary Snow and other cabinet members have all been involved in this effort.

Second, the Administration has built multilateral support for greater exchange rate flexibility in China. For example, one year ago, for the first time, the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors as a group called for exchange rate flexibility in large economies such as China, and they have repeated this joint call several times since then. And earlier this month in Washington, in a historic first, the G7 Finance Ministers and Governors met as a group with their Chinese counterparts and had a candid engagement on the exchange rate issue.

Third, the Bush Administration has worked intensively with the Chinese on the essential technical economic and financial steps needed move to exchange rate flexibility.  A detailed timeline of measurable reform actions was developed. Secretary Snow appointed an emissary, Ambassador Paul Speltz, to the Chinese government on the exchange rate issues, and the Ambassador has held many operationally-oriented talks with the Chinese authorities and the business community.

The Administration began a technical cooperation program last year as a means to accelerate reforms in the financial sector and currency regime. Talks have been held this year on foreign exchange risk, the use of derivatives, financial instruments to manage currency risk, banking systems and foreign exchange futures markets. The Chinese have publicly acknowledged the value of this program, and I am convinced that it will facilitate a faster move to a flexible exchange rate regime in China. Just last month at the time of the G7 meetings in Washington China reaffirmed its commitment to further advance reform and to push ahead firmly and steadily to a market-based flexible exchange rate.  And China has made measurable progress on this reform agenda. Specifically, it is relaxing restrictions on the capital account, restructuring its banking system, taking steps to develop the foreign exchange market, and building the trading systems necessary to hedge currency risk. But our job is not finished, and we will continue to engage with them frequently and firmly.

The Administration has also been actively engaging with China on trade, agriculture and intellectual property rights.  We are working to insure that the Chinese generally fulfill their WTO commitments.  In financial services, China has allowed GM and Ford Motor to provide motor vehicle financing to Chinese car buyers.  And, onerous funding and capitalization requirements for branching in both banking and insurance have been lowered.

China accelerated steps to allow U.S. companies to import, export, distribute, and sell products in China without using local state trading companies.  China has also agreed to non-discriminatory tax treatment for U.S. integrated circuits in China, the world's fastest growing semiconductor market.

The United States has also promoted steps in China to expand agricultural trade.  China's commitment to reduce barriers in agriculture within the WTO has helped spur growth in trade with the United States.  The United Stats exported a record $5 billion in agricultural goods to China in 2003, and U.S. agricultural exports to China in the first seven months this year rose by 35 percent over the same period last year.  In addition, China has agreed to implement new procedures and issue new product approvals for U.S. biotech soybeans, canola and corn and twelve U.S. biotech products have now been approved.  Finally, as a result of U.S. efforts, China has relaxed market constraints on soybeans and cotton trade, resulting in an all-time high in soybean exports to China during 2003 and a 431 percent increase in cotton exports in 2003 over the previous year.

Despite these significant, tangible improvements, a major concern for the United States government remains China's failure to provide adequate protection for, and enforcement of, intellectual property rights.  Real progress in this area requires China to show significant reductions in infringements of intellectual property rights and substantial improvements in enforcement.

Looking ahead, the Administration will continue to engage with China on banking sector reform, and financial market development, as well as the exchange rate.  We will continue to insist that China live up to its commitments in joining the WTO and in abiding by the rules of the international trading system.

**Concluding Remarks**The Bush Administration views the Japanese and Chinese economies and their increasing integration into the global trade and financial system as a tremendous opportunity for U.S. workers and businesses in producing the goods and services that an expanding Asian economy will demand.  The economic relationships between the United States and Japan and between the United States and China have changed direction under President Bush's leadership and the results have already been excellent.  For the first time in many years, Japan is growing again, providing support to global growth and continued expansion in the United States.  China is opening up its markets to agriculture, financial services, and other U.S. exports and it is taking concrete steps needed to create a market-based flexible exchange rate.
