---
title: Treasury Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Applauds Youth Financial Education Efforts in Midwestern States
date: 2004-10-20
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2043
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2043

Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. applauded the financial education efforts of Junior Achievement staff from eight Midwestern states at the organization's Midwestern Regional Conference in Grand Rapids, Michigan today.

Junior Achievement has been a powerful force in providing financial education to young people in so many communities across the United States and beyond, said Iannicola. Here in Michigan, and throughout the Midwest, young people are on the road to becoming fiscally responsible adults because of the work of those gathered here. Please know that all of us at the Department of Treasury are supportive of your efforts and that we share your passion for financial literacy.

 

The Conference, which featured the theme Make the Connection, will re-energize Junior Achievement field office leaders and staff from eight Midwestern states.

Junior Achievement, which is headquartered in Colorado Springs, Colorado, was founded in 1919 as a collection of small, after-school business clubs for students in Springfield, Massachusetts. It is a non-profit organization dedicated to educating and inspiring young people to value free enterprise, business and economics to improve the quality of their lives. Junior Achievement offers economic education programs that span grades K-12, with age-appropriate curricula designed to teach elementary students about their roles as individuals, workers, and consumers and to prepare middle-grade and high school students for the key economic and workforce issues they will face.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).

