---
title: Economic Growth in the Greater Middle East Under Secretary John B. Taylor Remarks
date: 2004-04-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1507
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1507

**To the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) Region Conference on the Challenges of Growth and Globalization** It is a pleasure for me to speak at this conference.  I thank the IMF’s Middle East and Central Asia Department and the IMF Institute for inviting me. I have greatly benefited and enjoyed working with dedicated professionals – like George Abed and Mohsin Khan – at the IMF.

I wish that I could have participated in the whole conference, especially to have been here this morning to listen to the papers by George Abed and others. That this type of economic growth research is having a significant impact on development policy is one of the themes of my remarks today.  And it would have been a special pleasure to spend more time interacting with my former Stanford colleague, Guido Tabellini, in a rough-and-tumble seminar setting.  But my job now is much more about applying economic research in practice than conducting such research.

Economic growth in the greater Middle East is a high priority of the Bush administration. As President Bush made clear in his National Endowment for Democracy speech on the greater Middle East last November, these economic growth issues are closely linked with political and security issues, perhaps even more so than in any other part of our foreign policy.  One indication of the importance of economic issues in this region for the U.S. Treasury is that I have traveled to the Middle East or key neighboring regions a dozen times since I was sworn in as Under Secretary in 2001.

My most recent trip was six weeks ago. I visited Baghdad, Amman, Kabul, Jerusalem, and Ramallah. I learned a tremendous amount – I want to emphasize this. I met with the finance ministers and other government officials in each city. I talked about U.S. assistance packages, about fundraising, and about ways to increase economic growth.  I visited reconstruction projects and schools to see how our assistance is being used, and I met with entrepreneurs to listen to their views on economic reform.  On this trip, I covered almost exactly the same ground as I did on a trip last June, when I visited the finance ministers and other officials from Iraq, Jordan, Afghanistan, Israel, and the Palestinian Authority. The two trips were separated in time by only eight months, yet, it was striking to me how much had transpired in each of these five places during that period. I would like to highlight these changes to illustrate our approach to economic growth in the Middle East.

Let me first emphasize, as President Bush said in his speech last November, “As we watch and encourage reforms in the region, we are mindful that modernization is not the same as Westernization.... There are, however, essential principles common to every successful society, in every culture.”

Many of those common principles are essential for raising economic growth.  Again to quote President Bush, successful societies: (1) “protect freedom and the consistent, impartial rule of law;” (2) “invest in the health and education of their people;” and (3) “privatize their economies and secure the rights of property.”  These essential principles closely parallel the principles that underlie the new Millennium Challenge Account, which is an important new initiative in U.S. foreign aid.  In that context, we speak of policies of “governing justly, investing in people, and encouraging economic freedom” as essential for economic growth.

But how do we know that these principles are essential? First of all, it is clear that the lack of high productivity jobs is the source of poverty and low incomes in the world, including the poorer areas of the Middle East and North Africa.  If there are only low productivity jobs - or no jobs - then incomes will be low and there will be more poverty.  It is almost a tautology.

Unfortunately, the recent trends in productivity growth in the Middle East are not good.  Guido Tabellini, in his paper for this conference, notes that productivity actually*fell*in the Middle East in the last 20 years, by 0.7 percent per year.  In contrast, this is a period when productivity was increasing in the United States, Europe and East Asia. This contrast is particularly strong and, I think, worrisome. And the pressure on increasing productivity and creating jobs will not diminish in the years ahead in the Middle East. Projections are that the working age population in the Middle East and North Africa will increase by about 50 million in the next ten years.

Why are so few high productivity jobs being created?  According to basic economic growth theory, productivity depends on two things: the amount of capital each person has to work with and the level of technology.  If there are no impediments to the flow and accumulation of capital and technology, then countries or areas that are behind in productivity should have a higher productivity growth rate.  Capital will flow to where it is in short supply relative to labor and, with more capital, higher productivity jobs can be created.  Similarly, technology can spread through education and training.  For these reasons, poor areas or countries can and should be catching up to rich areas or countries.

There is evidence for such catch-up when there are few impediments to the use and accumulation of capital and technology.  It is unfortunate that there is little evidence of such catch-up in the last twenty years in the greater Middle East as a whole.  Why has there not been more catch-up?  More and more evidence has been accumulating that significant impediments to investment and the adoption of technology are holding back countries and people.

One can group these impediments into three areas. It is not a coincidence that these three areas correspond to the principles I listed from President Bush’s recent speech on the greater Middle East, or principles from the Millennium Challenge Account.

First, poor governance – for example, the lack of the rule of law – creates disincentives to invest, to start up new firms, and to expand existing firms with high-productivity jobs.  This has a negative impact on capital formation and entrepreneurial activity.  In developing the Millennium Challenge Account, we used several indicators to measure the rule of law**– some developed by the World Bank Institute and some by other organizations; all are publicly available. The measures of the rule of law for MENA have a rating which is relatively low.For example, it is about one-fourth that of Canada: the numbers are 0.52 for the Middle East region and 2.11 for Canada, which in this context is representative of Europe, U.S., Japan and other industrialized nations.Of course, there is diversity within the greater Middle East area.The UAE measure, for instance, is much closer to Canada’s number than to the Middle East average.

Second, poor education and health **impede the development of human capital.  Workers without adequate education do not have the skills to take on high-productivity jobs or to adopt new technologies which increase the productivity of the jobs that they have already.

What do we know here?  It depends on how much students are learning. As a former professor, I know that sometimes you don’t know how effective you are until 20 years later. But the measures we have now, for example, on primary education completion rates show that the average for MENA is a 75 percent completion rate.  In industrialized countries, the completion rate is much higher. So, again there is a difference in education which could explain some of the differences in productivity which I discussed earlier.

The third impediment to growth relates to economic freedom.  Too many restrictions on economic transactions prevent people from trading goods and services and from adopting new technologies.  Lack of openness to trade, state monopolies, and excessive regulation are all examples of restrictions that reduce the incentives for innovation and investment needed to boost productivity.

What do we know about this? Again, there are indicators that we have tried to use in practice. One indicator of which I am particularly fond is the length of time it takes to start a business. The literature shows that this is a predictor of growth. In the MENA area, the average number of days that it takes to start a business is 43. In Canada, the average is three days, while in some countries in the MENA, it’s much longer than 43 days.

Trade openness is another indicator that has been measured by many objective institutions.  Here, a higher number in the index means less openness. For MENA, the number is 4.0, while it’s 2.0 for both Canada and Australia. Of course, other economic indicators show less difference with industrialized countries. Inflation, for example, is one of the indices on which the MENA region performs very well.

As a policy maker, I ask:How do we translate these very good ideas, research and measures of performance into what we do everyday? People like us ask these questions and remain convinced that improvement in the policies of ruling justly, investing in people, and encouraging economic freedom is what is needed to increase economic growth in the Middle East.  I’d like to share with you several examples of what is actually happening on the ground, based on my recent visits to the Middle East region.

First, when I speak with finance ministers, central bank governors, and private business people in the greater Middle East countries, I find no disagreement with this way of thinking about economic growth. They tell me what I’ve said here today. Indeed, I usually hear these same ideas even before I begin talking.  It’s no secret that in order to raise economic growth, one has to focus on these measures.

Second, it is clear that cases within the Middle East where good progress has been and is being made.  There are many examples of market-oriented economies that are removing barriers to economic growth. To name a few:

- Bahrain is a leading financial and trading center.
- Dubai has transformed itself into an important regional economic center.
- Morocco, as part of its free trade agreement with the United States, committed to keep its financial sector open to foreign investment. It also agreed to make its procedures for new regulation more transparent by allowing interested parties the opportunity to comment on proposed regulations.

Next, I’d like to share with you a few snapshots of my recent trips that illustrate how much has improved in the last eight months:

In Afghanistan, in the last few months, a new currency has been issued, roads has been completed and a new banking law has been passed which should assist in attracting foreign capital.Now, many more boys and girls are in school; industrial parks are being built; and customs facilities are being improved.Much work is also being done on land titling to establish property rights.

In Iraq, within only a few months, a new currency was introduced, and a seminal law was passed to make the central bank independent.  Recently, I met with a group of private bankers in Baghdad who were forming a trade group.  Foreign bank entry is progressing, with three foreign banks being considered for banking licenses, including the National Bank of Kuwait.

I also recently traveled to Jordan, where the government recently passed a new budget that will reduce subsidies that have been making it difficult for the economy to adjust.   Jordan has used qualified industrial zones to increase trade with great results.  Exports in Jordan grew by over 20 percent in 2001 and 2002.

For the Palestinian Authority,Finance Minister Fayyad has made remarkable progress toward a good, transparent budget process, including a direct deposit system under which funds are disbursed directly to employees. He has also helped to bring the petroleum monopoly under the control of the Finance Ministry.  The business community similarly recognizes that better regulation, better infrastructure and, of course, peace in that region would make a considerable difference in economic growth.

InIsrael,Finance Minister Netanyahu has put through a number of laudable reforms, including tax reductions and welfare and pension system reforms. Israel is poised to continue on this path with further privatization, improvements in the regulatory process, and increasing competition in the financial sector.

These are some of the very encouraging, significant measures that have taken place in a period of eight months in the greater Middle East region. I wish to leave you with a few examples of how we can continue to interact and engage one another constructively on these issues.

·Secretary Snow had a very important meeting with the Finance Ministers from the region in Dubai last September to begin a dialogue about how we can best work together on financial sector issues.  The United States is also establishing a Partnership for Financial Excellence, which is an effort to provide technical assistance and training in the region.

·In 2002, Treasury held a very successful workshop entitled “Islamic Finance 101” to educate U.S. policymakers about developments in Islamic finance.

·I was very impressed to learn about a recent European Central Bank meeting with the governors of the central banks from the MENA region.

·Finally, I am very pleased that the IMF has proposed establishing a training center in the region.

I look forward to continued progress on these and other important initiatives to promote economic growth in the MENA region. And I thank you again for giving me the opportunity to speak here today.
