---
title: Treasury to Host Inaugural Meeting of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission
date: 2004-01-28
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1120
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1120

The Department of the Treasury tomorrow will host the inaugural meeting of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission.  The Commission was established by the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act, signed by President Bush on December 4, 2003.  The Commission will work to promote and improve financial education by coordinating the many efforts underway at the 20 participating government agencies.  The legislation designated that the Secretary of the Treasury serve as the Chairperson of the Commission and that Treasury’s Office of Financial Education provide primary support to the Commission.

Tomorrow’s event will include opening remarks from Secretary Snow, followed by remarks from Chairman Alan Greenspan and other commission members.  Agencies that are members of the Commission are listed below.

**WHAT:**Inaugural Meeting of the Financial Education and Literacy Commission**WHEN:**Thursday, January 29, 200410:30 am EST**WHERE:**Department of the Treasury, Cash Room**WHO:**Secretary John W. Snow, Department of the TreasuryChairman Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors  Representatives of the other Commission Members: Office of the Comptroller of  the Currency; the Office of Thrift Supervision; the Federal Reserve; the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; the National Credit Union Administration; the Securities and Exchange Commission; the Departments of Education, Agriculture, Defense, Health and Human Services, Housing and Urban Development, Labor, and Veterans Affairs; the Federal Trade Commission; the General Services Administration; the Small Business Administration; the Social Security Administration; the Commodity Futures Trading Commission; and the Office of Personnel Management.

Tomorrow’s meeting will be webcast live at[www.home.treasury.gov](https://home.treasury.gov/)

**Media without Treasury press credentials planning to attend today’s event should contact the Treasury Public Affairs office**at 202/622-2960 with the following information: name, social security number and date of birth.  Media with White House press credentials must call to be cleared in to the Treasury Building.  Please plan to arrive at least 30 minutes early.
