---
title: U.S. Restores Information Sharing with Mexico
date: 2004-07-06
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1767
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS



js-1767

  

*Treasury Secretary John Snow made the following announcement today upon the reinstatement of information sharing by the United States with its Mexican financial intelligence unit counterpart, the Unidad de Inteligencia Financiera (UIF). The reinstatement follows the suspension of information sharing imposed by Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) on April 21, 2004. *



Over the past couple of months, the United States and Mexico engaged in vigorous, thorough discussions and examinations of our information sharing relationship. As Mexico has demonstrated their commitment to and recognizes the importance of holding the information we share to the utmost secrecy, we are pleased to re-engage in our information sharing relationship.



Our success against terrorist financiers and financial crooks can be dependent on the will and commitment of our allies around the world, including Mexico. I would like to thank Mexico's Finance Minister Gil Diaz for the swift and serious attention Mexico gave this important matter. We will continue to work with our neighbor to the South to rally against criminals and terrorists corrupting the global financial system.



Not only has the information sharing relationship between the United States and Mexico been restored, our confidence in that relationship has been restored, as well, said Snow.



-30-
