---
title: 'Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola teaches Cleveland Youth to Save as Part of "Roll Your Change Week" at the Boys and Girls Club'
date: 2004-10-20
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2046
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2046

Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. today participated in the 2nd Annual Roll Your Change Week at the Boys and Girls Club in Cleveland, Ohio. Today's event was one of many weeklong events sponsored by Cleveland Saves to increase awareness about saving money among Greater Clevelanders.

Coins are how most children are introduced to the concept of money, Iannicola said. Therefore coins are a great vehicle for teaching early lessons on saving. Today we showed kids how regularly setting aside something as insignificant as pocket change can add up to real money and can help form good savings habits.

It is estimated that there is over $10 billion in loose change sitting unproductively in homes across America not earning interest. During last year's Roll Your Change Week, over 1,798 people deposited $152,355 into their savings accounts, which averaged out to $84 per person in new deposits. Every person who makes a deposit of rolled change at one of the 17 participating financial institutions during this special week will be eligible to win a $1,000 Series I Savings Bond.

Cleveland Saves is a nonprofit, community-based coalition consisting of over 200 Greater Cleveland banks, colleges, community development corporations, companies, credit unions, faith-based organizations, government and nonprofit agencies and trade unions. The Cleveland Saves program was developed to help Clevelanders build wealth by saving money. Individuals enrolled in the program are required to set a financial goal for themselves and design a simple plan to reach their savings goal.The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).
