---
title: Taxpayer Advocacy Panel Recruitment Applications Now Being Accepted Deadline To Apply Is April 30, 2004
date: 2004-04-01
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1286
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS



js-1286



The Department of Treasury, along with the Internal Revenue Service, is inviting individuals to help improve the nation’s tax agency by applying to be members of the Taxpayer Advocacy Panel.The mission of the Panel is to provide citizen input into enhancing IRS customer satisfaction and service by identifying problems and making recommendations for improvement with IRS systems and procedures; elevating the identified problems to the appropriate IRS official; and referring individual taxpayers to the appropriate IRS office for assistance in resolving their problems.The Panel’s subcommittees will consist of 10 to 17 volunteer members who serve at the pleasure of the Secretary of Treasury and will function solely as advisory bodies.



The TAP programworksdirectly with the National Taxpayer Advocate’s Office on issues identified by the Taxpayer Advocacy Panel. The National Taxpayer Advocate is the taxpayers’ representative within the IRS and reports directly to theIRSCommissioner and to Congress through an annual report.



“Because of the Administration's actions to greatly expand the Taxpayer Advocate Panel to all 50 states, it now is able to play an even more critical role---ensuring that taxpayers from every corner of the country will have their voices heard,” said Treasury Secretary John Snow. “To reach the goal of providing world-class service to the hard working Americans who pay the taxes, one of the most vital things we must do is listen better to their concerns and suggestions, and ensure that their rights are being fully protected.After all, it's their money.”



“We are committed to working with taxpayersto improvethe customer-service focus of the IRS,” stated Nina Olson, National Taxpayer Advocate. “Working with taxpayers directly helpsus identify issues that may not be on the IRS radar screen.We can also hear their concerns about issues the IRS is already addressing.



**Taxpayer Advocacy Panel (TAP) members:**


- ****Get direct input from taxpayers about their experiences with the IRS.
- Identify and prioritize issues of greatest concern to taxpayers.
- Make recommendations to the IRS and Treasury on customer-service issues.
- Work with the IRS to help taxpayers address key issues and concerns.
- Report annually to Treasury and the National Taxpayer Advocate.


To qualify as a TAP member, applicants must beU.S.citizens, be able to make a significant time commitment to the panel, and meet certain other eligibility requirements.



Further details and the application are available at[www.improveirs.org](http://www.improveirs.org/)**or by calling**1-866-602-2223.**



Applications can be mailed to:MilwaukeeTAP OfficeStop 1006MIL310 West Wisconsin AvenueMilwaukee,WI53203-2221



Applications must be received by theMilwaukee TAP Office byApril 30, 2004.



-30-
