---
title: Secretary John W. Snow Remarks to the Maritime Trades Department Executive Board Hollywood, FL
date: 2004-03-05
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1214
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1214

 

Good morning.

Thank you, Mike, and thanks to everyone for having me here today.

Mike Sacco is a good friend, and this is an organization I’ve worked with for a long time. I know that the Maritime Trades Department represents a lot of what is best about America… so I’m delighted to be here.

Many of you remember me from my days in private life at CSX, when I was directly involved in the shipping industry so many of you.

In fact, I remember working with then-Transportation Secretary Andy Card, back in the early 90s, when we first developed the legislation that led to the Maritime Security Program (MSP).  Andy’s efforts as Secretary of Transportation really got the ball rolling and brought needed attention to the critical role the U.S. Merchant Marine plays in both the commerce of this country and its national security.

So I’m glad to be back, working with you again.

I hope that you find the Bush Administration to be your partner, your ally…

President Bush has always been committed to the U.S. Maritime Industry – when he was a candidate for president he pointed out your contributions, and the importance of maintaining the integrity of the Jones Act, and of the MSP.

It is hard to overstate the importance of this program to the vital interests of the U.S.  Because of it the U.S. government has continual access to the global logistics system made possible by the modern and sophisticated container shipping industry, which ties the ports of the world together with an intermodal transportation system linking the rail and trucking industries with the ocean container ships.  These extraordinary logistic capabilities are continuously at the ready in case of any need.The President wants you to know that he still appreciates your work and your priorities… and he’s kept his word to you.

I know I was pleased to see the passage and signing of legislation in December that extended and expanded the MSP through 2015. We increased the payment to MSP operators and expanded the number of vessels in the fleet to 60 ships.

MSP is a vital element of our military’s strategic sealift and global response capability, so it was high time we got a bill through expanding it… because this country needs you more than ever before.

The MSP legislation opened up a wide ranging debate about the role and value of the U.S. Merchant Marine.  That debate turned many skeptics into supporters as people got a chance to examine the realities of what the Merchant Marine does and how the program actually works.

It is important as that debate goes on that we remember Ronald Reagan’s admonition to some of his critics.  “It is not that they are ignorant,” he would say “it is that they know so much that isn’t so.”

MSP is another example of questionable theory taking a back seat to observable facts and realities.  This is a program that serves America well.   It is a program that must be and will be preserved.

This country needs you to protect it, and help us win the war on terror and face the threats to our security wherever they arise.

You are part of the legions of working men and women who have responded to the terrorists with guts and determination.

You patriotism and skills have made our response to September 11th as strong as it has been… and I want to thank you for that.

You’re showing the enemy that we won’t be beaten or deterred.

When we needed to defeat the Taliban, in Afghanistan, you were there.

And when we needed to remove Saddam Hussein from power, you were there.

During the first phase of Operation Iraqi Freedom alone, more than 5,000 U.S. Merchant Mariners served aboard U.S.-flag ships… and more than 1,200 merchant Mariners crewed the government’s Ready Reserve Force ships.

U.S.-flag commercial ships have carried more than 45.1 thousand twenty-foot-equivalent unit containers.

In fact, 84 percent of the cargo moved to support the war effort – that’s about 17 million square feet of cargo – was carried on U.S.-flag vessels. Cargo included Apache attack helicopters, multiple launch rocket systems, HUMVEES, fuel tankers, bulldozers and ammunition for our forces.

You delivered… and Saddam Hussein had to run and hide in a hole as a result.

But we got him out of there, too.

I know that you and your membership really understands that we are living in a different world since September 11th. One where we must be united to defeat the enemy. That’s why it’s so good to work with Merchant Mariners on the huge task of protecting our vessels and ports.

We are challenged with the task of ensuring that international and domestic commerce is secure, containers arriving in our ports are safe, and vessels sailing on the high seas and domestic waterways are not vulnerable to terrorist activity.

And for the U.S. economy to thrive, it is essential that we balance that need for additional security measures with the all-important goal of keeping our commerce flowing.

You understand the need to achieve that balance – the need to stand strong against our enemy without standing in the way of our free market – so your help in doing so is invaluable. We look forward to working with you to implement the new international maritime transportation security treaty that will come into effect this summer… as well as some new domestic regulations that are being implemented now to protect our ports, our vessels and our maritime communities.

All of this adds up to a result that we can no longer take for granted: a secure supply chain for the U.S. It’s a fundamental need that became more complicated, and I feel that all parties involved have risen to the occasion… again, because you understand what kind of economic harm could be done if terrorists were to shut down any part of our supply chain.

The bottom line is that we'll do everything in our power to defend the homeland. And we know that the best way to defend the homeland is to stay on the offensive. The best way to protect America is to find the killers and bring them to justice before they ever harm another American -- and that's exactly what President Bush’s administration will continue to do, with your help.

This is why the Patriot Act is so important, and why Congress needs to extend it.

The Patriot Act gives federal law enforcement – some of whom operate under the Treasury Department’s umbrella – the tools they need to seize terrorists' assets and disrupt their cells.

The Patriot Act removed legal barriers that once prevented the FBI and the CIA from sharing information, information that is necessary to uncover terrorist plots before they are carried out in America.

The Act also imposes tougher penalties on terrorists and their supporters. The goal is to send a clear message to those who wish to harm us: that there will be a consequence.

For years we've used similar provisions, provisions that are now in the act, to catch embezzlers and drug traffickers. What's in the Patriot Act today is nothing new; we've been using these provisions in the past… we just decided that if the methods are good enough for hunting criminals, they're even more important for hunting terrorists.

I think you’ll agree with me when I say that our response to the terrorist networks of 9/11 has been loud and clear: this country will never retreat and lick its wounds. We will strke back, and we will win.

From the men and women serving bravely in our armed forces to the firemen of New York City and Arlington, Virginia, to the Merchant Marines… we responded as one, and the message was clear.

Today it’s important that the terrorists know our memories are not short.So the President appreciates your vigilance… and approaching every day on your job as if 9/11 was yesterday.

The President also appreciates the key role you play in keeping our economy running, and growing.

President Bush inherited a recession, and the terrorist attacks wounded us economically as well as physically. The economy is beginning to turn around; thanks to the President’s tax cuts and the hard work of folks like you, our economy has been growing for several months now.

It’s an incredibly resilient economy; it really is unique in the world. Other world leaders are amazed at how we recovered from the perfect storm of an inherited recession, the stock market meltdown, terrorist attacks and corporate scandals.

But you and I are not really surprised, are we? We know that America can’t be kept down for long.

Now that we’re getting back on our feet, we’ve got to do more – like making sure that every American worker who is looking for a job can find one. Because losing a job, being without a job, is one of the very toughest things individuals and families can go through.

That’s why the President has asked the congress to make his tax cuts – the very ones that stimulated us into recovery and growth – permanent. He wants to make sure that more of your money stays in your pockets!After all, who knows better how to spend your money – you or Uncle Sam?The surest path to more jobs is a growing economy.  That is why the President is so focused on making sure the economy continues to grow and expand.

We also have to make sure that people have the opportunity to learn the skills that are required for 21st century jobs.  And here is where the Maritime training schools like the SIU School in St. Mary’s County, Maryland and the Masters and Mates School – a pilot school outside of Baltimore – play such a useful role.

I have visited your schools.  I have been to the SIU School in St. Mary’s County.  I have met with the young men and women there.  And I’ve been to the Masters and Mates School outside of Baltimore.  From firsthand knowledge I know the commitment you bring to see that another generation of seamen have the experience they need to man the U.S. merchant ships.

Through these schools you are giving people the opportunity to learn the skills the need to have good jobs, and that’s exactly what our country needs right now.

Tax cuts and open markets are the key to job creation. You’ve heard some of the President’s opponents talk about isolationism… but in your profession, you know that trade is a lifeblood, and that our shores are doorways to 95 percent of the world’s markets… and that’s good for our farmers and manufacturers. We don’t want to shut those doors down.We also have common ground on energy policy.  Both our economic security and our national security are bound up in energy policy.  Through greater access to reliable and dependable U.S. energy supplies like ANWR we lessen our dependence on supplies from other, lesss secure, parts of the world.  We make ourselves less dependent on those uncertain supplies from places where tensions run high and where disruption is always possible.

America runs on energy and we need greater access to our own domestic supplies to assure adequate supplies of reliable low cost energy.  That is good for our economic and it is important to our security. The Maritime Trades and Constructions Unions know that and you have supported the efforts to open up ANWR… something that will create jobs for Merchant Marines.You know that opening up Alaska means good jobs, Jones Act jobs, more reliable energy supplies and a more secure country.

The President deeply appreciates your support on that critical issue.I want to thank  you all again – both personally and on behalf of the President – for what you do to protect our homeland and keep our economy humming.

This Administration is committed to our partnership because it is critical to our economic and national security.  Your press release last week underscores the importance of this partnership and the need to continue to maintain a strong viable U.S. flag Merchant Marine.

You are patriots. You truly understand the greatness of America, and I’m proud to call you friend.

Thank you for having me here today.
