---
title: 'United States-Brazil to Hold "Group for Growth" Meetings in Washington, DC'
date: 2004-12-14
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2146
---
*(Archived Content)*

**On Wednesday, December 15, the  United States and  Brazil will hold the third meetings of the Group for Growth in  Washington ,  DC .   The meetings will begin at  9:30 AM in the Treasury Department's Media Room,  1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW .**

The U.S. delegation will be chaired by John B. Taylor, Under Secretary for International Affairs at the Department of Treasury.The Brazilian delegation will be chaired by Joaquim V. Levy, Secretary of the National Treasury, Finance Ministry.*(Participant list attached.)*

Formation of the Group was announced at the June 2003 meeting between President Bush and President Lula with the goal of developing strategies to raise economic growth in both countries.Since then, meetings were held in August 2003 in Washington, and last April in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

The delegations will discuss the measures each country is taking to raise productivity growth and strategies for increasing growth in the future.

***The TOP of the meeting will be OPEN PRESS.   Media wishing to cover the top of meeting should assemble at the Treasury Media Room (Room 4121) no later than  9:15 AM . *At  2:30 PM , Under Secretary Taylor and Secretary Levy will hold a brief Media Availability in the Media Room. Media without Treasury or White House press credentials planning to attend should contact Treasury's Office of Public Affairs at (202) 622-2960 with the following information: name, social security number, and date of birth. This information may also be faxed to (202) 622-1999 or email to frances.anderson@do.treas.gov.  U.S.-Brazil Group for Growth  Participants  United States **

Dr. John Taylor, Under Secretary for International Affairs

Dr. Mark Warshawsky, Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy

Dr. Harvey Rosen, Council of Economic Advisers, Member-Designate

Dr. Nancy Lee Deputy Assistant Secretary, Europe, Eurasia, and the Western Hemisphere

Mr. James Derham, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary, Western Hemisphere Affairs, State

Dr. Tom Connors, Senior Associate Director, Federal Reserve Board

Mr. Ramin Toloui, Director, Office of the Western Hemisphere, U.S. Treasury,

Mr. Mathew Haarsager, U.S. Treasury Representative for South America

Dr. Francisco Parodi, Brazil Economist, Office of the Western Hemisphere, U.S. Treasury,

Dr. Patrice Robitaille, Brazil Economist, Federal Reserve Board

Mr. David Edwards, Senior Brazil Desk Officer, State

Mr. Bill Block, Council of Economic Advisers

Mr. Anthony Curcio, Office of Management and Budget

**Brazil**Dr. Joaquim V. Levy, Secretary of the National Treasury, Finance Ministry

Ambassador Roberto Abdenur, Embassy of Brazil

Mr. Nestor Forster, Embassy of Brazil, Financial Section
