---
title: "Treasury Announces the Appointment of Art Garcia to Serve As Director of the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund"
date: 2004-05-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1534
press_release_number: JS1534
---

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS
JS-1534
Secretary of the Treasury, John W. Snow today announced the appointment of Arthur A. Garcia to serve as Director of Treasury’s Community Development Financial Institutions Fund.
As Director of the CDFI Fund, Mr. Garcia will oversee the expansion of access to capital and financial services in critically under-served urban, rural and Native American communities, where one of the biggest obstacles to economic development is a lack of access to mainstream sources of private sector capital.
“The Community Development Financial Institution Fund plays an important role in the Bush’s Administration’s efforts to encourage economic growth and job creation in every corner of this nation. Art Garcia’s experience and knowledge will be a great asset as we continue to pursue these goals,” stated Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions, Wayne A. Abernathy.
Mr. Garcia has served as the Administrator of the Rural Housing Service (RHS) at the U.S. Department of Agriculture since April 2002.  Prior to coming to
Washington D.C., Mr. Garcia served on the faculty of both Webster University and the University of Phoenix and the College of Santa Fe.
In addition, Mr. Garcia was a Lender Manager with Sunwest Bank, and he also served as Vice President of retail banking at First State Bank in
New Mexico.  Mr. Garcia has served as President of the Hispanic Bankers Association.
Mr. Garcia is a graduate of
New Mexico State University and the School of Banking at the University of New Mexico.  He also received a Masters Degree in Finance and a Masters of Business Administration from Webster University.
-30-
