---
title: Treasury Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Addresses Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy
date: 2004-12-10T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2139
---
*(Archived Content)*

js-2139

Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. today spoke to the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy in Washington, DC. Iannicola addressed members representing nonprofit, private and government organizations focused on improving financial education for young people. He spoke about the[www.MyMoney.gov](http://www.mymoney.gov/)Web site and the 1-888-mymoney toll-free hotline launched by the Financial Literacy and Education Commission. The free service provides the American public with easy access to federal financial education materials covering a wide-range of personal financial topics.

For years the federal government has had a treasure of free financial education materials, said Iannicola. But up until now it has been a hidden treasure. MyMoney is an excellent tool for consumers of all ages and those organizations, like Jump$tart members, who teach them at the grass roots level.

The Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy is a non-profit organization that seeks to improve the personal financial literacy of young people. Jump$tart's purpose is to evaluate the financial literacy of young people; develop, disseminate, and encourage the use of standards for grades K-12; and promote the teaching of personal finance.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education. Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning. The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States. For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).

 

-30-
