---
title: Treasury Announces Market Financing Estimates
date: 2004-08-02
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1820
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

 

The Treasury Department announced today that it expects net borrowing of marketable debt to total $89 billion in the July – September 2004 quarter. The estimated cash balance on September 30 is $35 billion. In the last quarterly announcement on May 3, 2004, Treasury announced that it expected net borrowing to total $91 billion with an estimated end-of-quarter cash balance of $35 billion. The small change in borrowing is due to higher receipts offset by lower State and Local Government Series net issuances.

Treasury also announced that it expects net borrowing of marketable debt to total $122 billion in the October – December 2004 quarter. The estimated cash balance on December 31 is $35 billion.

During the April – June 2004 quarter, Treasury's net marketable borrowing totaled $31 billion and the cash balance on June 30 was $45 billion. On May 3, Treasury announced that it expected net marketable borrowing to total $38 billion with an estimated end-of-quarter cash balance of $45 billion. The decrease in borrowing is largely attributable to higher receipts and lower outlays offset by lower State and Local Government Series net issuances.

Additional financing details relating to Treasury's Quarterly Refunding will be released at 9:00 A.M. on Wednesday, August 4.

-30-

**REPORTS**

- [Market Financing Estimates](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/js_1820_qrc_attachment080204.pdf)
