---
title: Statement by Deputy Secretary Bodman on the Treasury's Iftaar
date: 2004-11-08
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2092
---
*(Archived Content)*



js-2092



Assalamualaikum and warm Ramadan greetings. I was honored tonight to have welcomed a group of Ambassadors and distinguished guests to the Treasury Department during the holy month of Ramadan.



According to Muslim teachings, the Holy Quran was sent down from heaven, a guidance unto men, a declaration of direction, and a means of Salvation during the month of Ramadan. This is a time of worship, contemplation, prayer and fasting. And, in celebrating tonight's Iftaar, I want to remind the Muslim community that America stands with you - both here in the United States and around the world.



We gathered this evening in the spirit of peace, cooperation and charity. In this holy month of Ramadan, we are reminded of the generosity of Muslims of good faith. Faithful Muslims, inspired to lead lives of honesty, integrity and compassion, have enriched the lives of countless people around the globe through their charity. So tonight, we honored the many good deeds and generosity of the Muslim people.



The ethos and sanctity of charity is fundamental to Islam, as it is to all great religions. And so during Ramadan and always, let us come together, regardless of faith, and work side-by-side to brighten the future and better our world.



I want to thank our guests for having taken the time tonight during this sacred month to celebrate with us at the Treasury Department. Ramadan Mubarak, said Deputy Secretary Bodman.



-30-
