---
title: SBA Economic Growth Tour to Make Stop in Kansas City Treasury Secretary Snow, SBA Administrator Barreto to Meet with Local Business Owners
date: 2004-04-07T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1299
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

KANSAS **CITY** –U.S. Treasury SecretaryJohnSnowwill join Hector Barreto, Administrator of the U.S. Small Business Administration, at the final in a series of 11 regional economic growth events on April 12th inKansas City,Missouri. The event will highlight the success of local entrepreneurs and will focus on the issues of greatest importance to the continued growth of small business.

“Small businesses play a vital role in creating opportunity for millions of Americans,” said Barreto. “It is critical that we create an environment in which entrepreneurship can flourish by providing small businesses with the information they need to succeed, saving taxpayer dollars by ensuring open competition to government contracts, and tearing down regulatory barriers to job creation.”

“I am looking forward to bringing our regional conference and economic growth tour toKansas City,” Barreto added. “These conferences are allowing us to meet with small business owners across the country, and hear firsthand what we can do to ensure even greater success.”

The regional event, which is being cosponsored by Hewlett-Packard, will begin with a tour of A Zahner Company (1500 E. 9thStreet,Kansas City,MO) by Snow and Barreto. Following the tour will be a roundtable discussion on the economy and other small business issues with several small business owners from the Region VII area (which includesKansas,Nebraska,MissouriandIowa).

Following the roundtable,SecretarySnowand Administrator Barreto will speak at a luncheon for more than 400 members of the small business community at the Hyatt Regency Hotel (2345 McGee Street). The luncheon will provide an opportunity for small business owners and prospective entrepreneurs to meet with local bankers, venture capitalists, resource and trade partners and local SBA staff to learn about programs and services available. Small business owners from across Region VII will also be receiving awards for their outstanding achievements and contributions to the small business community.

** WHO: ** John Snow, U.S. Treasury SecretaryHector V. Barreto, Administrator, U. S. Small Business Administration ** WHEN: ** Monday, April 12, 2004 ** EVENT:9:00 a.m. –  10:00 a.m ** Tour of A. Zahner CompanyArchitectural Metals, 1500 E. 9thStreet,Kansas City,MO** 10:30 a.m. – 11:30 a.m.** Small Business Roundtable DiscussionHyatt Regency Hotel (CrownCenter)Van Horn A & B2345 McGee St.,Kansas City,MO ** Noon – 1:30 p.m.** Small Business LuncheonHyatt Regency Hotel (CrownCenter)2345 McGee Street,Kansas City,MO

 

###
