---
title: US-Africa Mortgage Market Initiative Roundtable on Developing the Nigerian Mortgage Market U.S. Treasury Under Secretary John B. Taylor Opening Remarks
date: 2004-10-05
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1998
---
*(Archived Content)*

      

js-1998



Thank you Mr. Rosenfeld for the warm welcome.Over the past year Ginnie Mae has provided critical support to the African Mortgage Market Initiative.I hope we can continue to work together to develop mortgage markets inAfrica.



I would like now to welcome to Minister Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala and her delegation which includes Mr. Tanimu Yakubu, Managing Director of the Federal Mortgage Bank.Minister Okonjo-Iweala is Minister of Finance for the Federal Republic of Nigeria. Before becoming Minister in July 2003 she was a Vice President and Corporate Secretary of the World Bank.



I would also like to welcome the participants seated here today.We have representatives from a number of private sector companies, including banks, law firms, consulting firms, mortgage banks and investment banks.I am also happy to have representatives from the IFC, the World Bank and from a number of US government agencies including the White House, State Department, USAID, OPIC and of course Ginnie Mae.

  

This roundtable is being held under the auspices of the President Bush's African Mortgage Market Initiative, which he announced inAbuja,Nigeriaa little over a year ago.In his announcement the President called for theUSgovernment to assist African countries develop mortgage markets.The rational for this focus on mortgage market is compelling.Development of robust mortgage markets result in increased wealth and welfare for households.Development also deepens retail banking and helps create local capital markets.In short, mortgage finance and all related activities contributes greatly to an economy.In developed countries such as theUnited States, the housing sector and all related sectors contribute over 25% to GDP.



TheUSgovernment is currently working on 20 projects in nine African countries, includingNigeria.Since the President's announcement theUShas over $260 million in firm OPIC loan commitments and has an additional $100 million in loan commitments awaiting approval.USAID has funded a $4 million micro-lending program inNigeriawith the first loan schedule to be originated by the end of the year.It has also funded over $300 thousand in technical assistance forSouthern Africa.In addition to managing the initiative, Treasury, with the help of Ginnie Mae, has undertaken a number of government-to-government technical assistance programs aimed at primary and secondary mortgage market development.



We are here today to talk about how best to develop the Nigerian mortgage market.Nigeriais a country of 137 million with virtually no mortgage market or housing market to speak of.With an estimated housing deficit of over 5 million units,Nigeriadesperately needs housing and housing finance.



Today's discussion will focus on a number of aspects of the market including land title issues, mortgage funding, credit risk management, mortgage servicing and the role of government in the market.



I encourage you to also discuss how the expatriate Nigerian population in theUnited Statesmight be integrated into the Nigerian mortgage market.



The market for expatriate mortgage services could be large as there are currently over 700,000 Nigerians of working age living in theUSA.Tapping these expatriates might help develop the Nigerian real estate and mortgage markets and provide business opportunities for both US and Nigerian companies.



Thank you.I believe that we will have a lively and productive discussion this morning.
