---
title: Treasury International Capital (TIC) Data For June
date: 2004-08-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1858
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free Adobe® Acrobat® Reader®. *

*To view or print the Microsoft Excel content on this page, download the free Microsoft Excel Viewer. *

js-1858

 

Treasury International Capital (TIC) data for June are released today and posted on the U.S. Treasury web site ([www.treas.gov/tic](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic)). The next release date, which will report on data for July, is scheduled for September 16, 2004.

**Long-Term Domestic Securities**Gross purchases of domestic securities by foreigners were $1,338.8 billion in June, exceeding gross sales of domestic securities by foreigners of $1,253.3 billion during the same month.

Foreign purchases of domestic securities reached $85.5 billion on a net basis in June, relative to $62.4 billion during the previous month. Private net flows reached $67.2 billion in June. Net private purchases of Treasury Bonds and Notes rose to $23.0 billion from $14.7 billion the preceding month. Net private purchases of Government Agency Bonds were $15.3 billion, down from $21.3 billion the previous month. Net private purchases of Corporate Bonds rose to $26.5 billion from $19.8 billion the previous month. Net private purchases of Equities increased to $2.4 billion from minus $7.8 billion.

Official net purchases of U.S. securities were $18.3 billion in June, relative to $14.5 billion in May. Official net purchases of Treasury Bonds and Notes of $17.5 billion accounted for the bulk of official inflows in June, up from $14.6 billion the previous month.

**Long-Term Foreign Securities**Gross purchases of foreign securities owned by U.S. residents were $291.4 billion in June, relative to gross sales of foreign securities to U.S. residents of $305.1 billion during the same month.

Gross sales of foreign securities to U.S. residents exceeded purchases by $13.7 billion, highlighting a net U.S. acquisition of $7.5 billion in Foreign Equities and $6.2 billion in Foreign Bonds.

**Net Long-Term Securities Flows**Net foreign purchases of both domestic and foreign long-term securities from U.S. residents were $71.8 billion in June compared with $65.2 billion in May. Net foreign purchases of long-term securities were $788.2 billion in the 12-months through June 2004 as compared to $694.7 billion during the twelve months through June 2003.

The full June data set, including adjustments for repayments of principal on asset-backed securities, as well as historical series, can be found on the TIC web site,[www.treas.gov/tic/](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic).

Revised data for the January 2003 through May 2004 period are being published this month for a number of series.

**REPORTS**

- [Foreigners’ Transactions in Long-Term Securities with U.S. Residents (PDF)](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/js1858_june04presstable.pdf)
- [Foreigners’ Transactions in Long-Term Securities with U.S. Residents (Excel)](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/ticjune2004table.pdf.xls)
