---
title: 'Celebrating and Learning from a Winning International Economic Strategy: John B. Taylor Written Version of Remarks before the St. Louis Gateway Chapter of the National Association of Business Economists'
date: 2004-10-22
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2055
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2055

Thank you for inviting me to speak here this morning. It is a special pleasure to be here on the morning after that Cardinal victory last night, with St. Louis fans in such a good mood. My talk will be about the global economy, rather than baseball, but I hope you will leave the talk in an equally good mood because we have a lot of good news to celebrate about the global economy. And just as we can learn from the winning sports strategy that brought the Cardinals victory, we can also learn from the winning economic strategy that is leading to this good global economic performance.

So I'm going to start by celebrating some important recent developments in the global economy. And then, with the goal of learning in mind, I'm going to try to answer the question: Why are global economic conditions so good? And how can we keep them at least as good and even make them better?

**How Strong is the World Economy Right Now?**

To answer this question let me review the recent data. The International Monetary Fund's most recent estimate of global growth for this year is 5 percent, higher than in thirty years. And there is no major economy in recession. In fact, most economies in the world are now growing at a healthy goldi-locks pace--neither too fast, nor too slow--suggesting that the global economic expansion will continue.

The United States is expanding at a sustainable pace--3.3 percent in the second quarter, with soon to be released data for the third quarter promising to look good again. Japan has also been growing nicely at 3.5 percent since the beginning of 2002, in contrast to its lost decade of the 1990s with near zero growth. China's rapid growth earlier in the year is slowing to a more sustainable pace, and the rest of Asia is again doing well after last year's SARS scare. In Latin America, growth has picked up in Mexico, Columbia, Peru, Chile, Brazil, and Argentina. Latin America grew at over 5 percent so far this year. Russia and most of the European economies are also growing strong. Even the French and German economies have shown signs of growth this summer.

One of the most auspicious developments in the world economy is that inflation is low in most countries, with global inflation much lower than in the 1990s. That inflation is low in emerging markets is especially significant. The average inflation rate in emerging markets was 65 percent in the mid 1990s. Now it is about 6 percent. Such a benign inflation environment in the United States and other large economies is more evidence that the global economic expansion should continue.

If you look around the world you see no major financial crises. This is in striking contrast to the 1990s when one financial crisis after another brought high interest rates and soaring unemployment to the economies of Latin America, Asia, and Russia. One reason for this favorable development is that contagion of financial crises across countries has diminished. Recall that contagion was a major concern in the 1990s. It was in 1998 that the default on Russia's debt caused financial storms as far away as Africa, Latin America, and East Asia. In the more recent Argentina default in 1998 there was no contagion beyond Argentina's neighbor, Uruguay.

Another favorable development is that interest rate spreads between emerging market bonds and U.S. Treasuries are at historically low levels. The spreads are important measures of global risk. Spreads have come down markedly during the last two years. They have stayed down despite the forecasts early this year that spreads would rise sharply throughout the year as monetary tightening in the United States began.

Of course, good times are no reason to be complacent. One element of risk today is the high price of oil. Those higher prices are a drag on economic growth, but the global economy is strong and the expansion can withstand such shocks. But such risks are a reminder that we cannot be complacent, despite the otherwise excellent economic situation.

**Why Are Economic Times Good?**

A big part of the answer is found in economic policies--both better*domestic*policies implemented in the United States and other countries and better*international*economic policy implemented by the United States in partnership with the international community.

**Better Domestic Economic Policies**The United States economy is growing--despite the setback of the downturn starting in 2000, the 9/11 terrorist attacks, and the corporate scandals--because of the timely response of monetary and fiscal policy. President Bush's tax cut in 2001 was extraordinarily well-timed to help deal with the recession. It helped bring us out of the downturn and make it one of the shortest and shallowest in U.S. history. The second round of tax cuts in 2003 also helped bolster the economy, and we will continue to see the benefits of that reduction in tax rates with higher growth throughout the expansion.

The Japanese economy is growing because Prime Minister Koizumi insisted on fundamental change, and monetary growth was increased and non-performing loans were reduced. Improved economic relations between the United States and Japan--led by President Bush and Prime Minister Koizumi--had a lot to do with these changes, as I will discuss later.

Similar explanations hold for other good performances, including the high growth and declining inflation under President Lula in Brazil and Prime Minister Erdogan in Turkey, two countries that had been plagued by crisis at the start of the Bush Administration. As with Japan, support by the United States for these allies and their economic policies has been important.

What about the decline of crises and risk spreads? One reason they are down is because of the more credible focus on price stability by central banks--aided by market-determined flexible exchange rates--that has largely ended the boom-bust cycle in many countries and is now laying the foundation for what may be the longest global boom we have ever seen. This trend began with the Federal Reserve years ago but has spread around the world in more recent years.

**Better International Economic Policies**In addition, the international financial institutions have begun to reform, following calls by the Bush Administration and joined by many of our allies. Important reforms include greater clarity and predictability in the use of large-scale financing from the International Monetary Fund, the use of collective action clauses in emerging market debt, and the movement toward grants rather than loans at the World Bank.

Such reforms themselves--while still very recent in their implementation--improve confidence, showing that international financial officials can work to make needed changes in the international financial system. Greater transparency at central banks and governments has also helped to reduce contagion by enabling market analysts to better discriminate between countries that follow good policies and those that do not.

There are a number of other international economic policy developments--many initiated by the Bush Administration--that are contributing to improved economic performance.

The Group of Seven-- Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan the United Kingdom and the United States--has been the forum for a number of important economic initiatives. The G-7 Agenda for Growth, which was implemented last year under U.S. leadership, has brought a greater multilateral focus to structural, supply-side policies, especially in Europe and Japan, to increase flexibility and boost productivity growth and employment. The shift we have seen toward supply side, pro-growth policies in the G-7 discussion has been marked in the last few years.

Another multilateral initiative of the G-7 embodied in the Boca Raton communiqucalled for monetary policies based on market-determined flexible exchange rates in large countries such as China as the key to promoting price stability and smooth and widespread adjustments in the international financial system. And we are pleased that the Chinese joined the G-7 in an historic, first time engagement to discuss monetary and exchange rate issues at a meeting earlier this month.

To help improve growth and reduce poverty in the poorest countries, President Bush proposed the establishment of the Millennium Challenge Corporation, a new U.S. organization which will provide grant financing to very poor countries that are choosing good economic policies based on clear strategies for measuring progress toward stated results. This new corporation is now up and running, authorized and funded by Congress.

Yet another international initiative is the new U.S.-Japan Partnership for Growth established in 2001 by President Bush and Prime Minister Koizumi. It called for candid, but not antagonistic, discussions on how to promote sustained economic growth. Here we have focused on the importance of dealing with non-performing loans and deflation, and we are grateful, as mentioned above, that Japan has made important strides on these issues.

In another international effort, President Bush and President Lula created a new U.S.-Brazil Group for Growth, a bilateral forum to review and assess strategies to promote productivity growth and job creation. I am pleased to report that the government of Brazil has already observed a positive impact of this undertaking on small business lending programs.

Early in the Bush Administration, President Bush and President Fox of Mexico created The Partnership for Prosperity, a private-public alliance to promote investment in parts of Mexico where growth has lagged; this has already generated results in the form of falling costs of remittances. In fact, this experience helped spur a new global remittances initiative in the G-8, through which we hope to extend our success in Mexico to other parts of the world.

Most recently, President Bush, working together with his G-8 colleagues, has established a new Broader Middle East and North Africa initiative, designed to support economic freedom and financial integration in this crucial region. Very successful first meetings on economic issues have already occurred in Dubai and Washington, and a meeting in Morocco is being scheduled for later in the year. Finance ministers and central bank governors from both Iraq and Afghanistan attended and contributed to these meetings.

And in one of the most important policy developments, the Bush Administration is following a multi-pronged trade agenda to reduce trade barriers through the Doha Development Round, as well as bilateral and regional trade agreements. Free trade agreements with Chile, Singapore, Australia, Morocco, Bahrain, and Central America are either already in law or nearly finished.

 **Concluding Remarks**I think it's fair to conclude that this is a remarkable record of policy achievements. But the main lesson to learn from this list of achievements is that economic policies are actually improving--both domestically and internationally--and along with them economic performance is also improving. There are indeed future challenges and there is, of course, room for improvement. Nevertheless, such accomplishments should give us confidence that by continuing and expanding this winning strategy we can we can tackle these future challenges.
