---
title: 'MEDIA ADVISORY: Secretary Snow To Visit Europe Next Week for Economic and G-20 Meetings'
date: 2004-11-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2096
---
*(Archived Content)*

U.S. Treasury Secretary John W. Snow will travel to four European countries next week to discuss the state of the global economy and efforts to continue strong global economic growth. Secretary Snow will visit Ireland, the United Kingdom and Poland, as well as participate in the Group of 20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors' meeting in Germany.Snow will be in Dublin Nov. 14-15 to meet with economic leaders to review the policies that have resulted in strong economic growth in Ireland in recent years. He also will meet with Dublin City University officials, students and alumni to discuss the role education has played in Ireland's economic growth story. The United States is one of Ireland's largest trading partners and the country has benefited from investments by U.S. companies.The Secretary will be in London Nov. 16-17 to discuss ongoing efforts to encourage growth and entrepreneurship in the U.K. On Nov. 16, he will deliver at speech at Chatham House that will address the relationship of the U.S. economy to the global economy.The Secretary's visit to Warsaw on Nov. 18 will be highlighted by a roundtable meeting with the finance ministers of Poland, Hungary, Slovakia and the Czech Republic. The four nations are new members of the European Union.Secretary Snow then will proceed to Berlin, Germany for the G-20 meetings Nov. 20-22. In addition to the official G-20 meetings, he will host a series of bi-lateral meetings with other attending finance ministers.



The following events are open to the media, which must present media credentials or photo ID:



**Monday, Nov. 15**



Tour and Remarks at Dublin City UniversityDublin City UniversityDublin, Ireland**11:30 am local time** Media must RSVP to Michael Murphy +353-1-700-5467** Media must arrive by 11:00 am local time** A press availability will be held immediately following the event**



**Wednesday, Nov. 17**



Remarks to Chatham HouseChatham House10 St. James SquareLondon, England**8:30 am local time** Media must arrive by 8:00 am local time**



**Thursday, Nov. 18**



Press Availability Following Roundtable withFinance Ministers of Poland, Hungary, Slovakia and the Czech RepublicMinistry of Foreign Affairs Palaceul. Foksal 6Warsaw, Poland**1:30 pm local time** Media must arrive by 1:00 pm local time**



**Saturday, Nov. 20**



G-20 Group PhotoInterContinental Hotel, Wintergarten RoomBudapester Strasse 2Berlin, Germany**1:15 pm local time** Media must arrive by 12:30 pm local time**



**Sunday, Nov. 21**



Secretary Snow's G-20 Press Conference12:00 pm local timeInterContinental Hotel, Room Chur I + IIBudapester Strasse 2Berlin, Germany**1:15 pm local time** Media equipment must be in place by 11:00 am for security sweeps**



****
