---
title: Bush Economic Team Visits Workers, Business Owners, Families in Washington
date: 2004-02-17
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1178
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1178

President’s Efforts to Strengthen the Economy and Create Jobs Discussed

    

**FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: February 17, 2004**



**CONTACT:       Rob Nichols at 202-622-2920 **

  

Treasury Secretary John W. Snow, Commerce Secretary Don Evans, Labor Secretary Elaine L. Chao, and Small Business Administrator Hector Barreto traveled through Washington on a bus today, making stops to discuss the state of the economy and the President’s jobs and growth plan - as well as other efforts by President Bush to create jobs, strengthen the economic recovery and increase workers' standards of living.

  

“There is no better way to get a feel for how the economy is doing, and what people really need from their government, than to get out here and visit with folks,” Snow said. “We’re hearing that tax cuts have worked well so far for businesses and families inWashington– and that taxes shouldn’t be increased now, just when progress is being made. We intend to bring that message back to Capitol Hill,” he added.

  

More than two million taxpayers inWashingtonwill have lower income tax bills in 2004 as a result of President Bush's Jobs and Growth Act.

  

This administration will not be satisfied until everyone who wants to work can find a job.There are tremendous resources available to help workers transitioning between jobs and we want workers inWashingtonandOregonto know about them -- there is something for everyone. said Secretary of Labor Elaine L. Chao.

  

Secretaries Snow, Evans and Chao and Administrator Barreto visited the Spokane Intercollegiate Research and Technology Institute foundation this morning, talked with women business owners inRichlandthis afternoon, and met with families at a Mexican restaurant inYakimaat the end of the day. At each stop, participants were encouraged to give a report on how the economy is doing in their community, and make suggestions for ways to increase growth and job creation.

  

The bus tour will continue inOregontomorrow. Secretaries Snow, Evans and Chao conducted a similar tour ofWisconsinandMinnesotain July 2003.

    

-30-
