---
title: 'MEDIA ADVISORY: Treasury Secretary John Snow to Visit Little Rock, Arkansas and St. Louis, Missouri This Week'
date: 2004-06-01T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1700
---
*(Archived Content)*

U.S. Treasury Secretary John W. Snow will visit Little Rock, Arkansas on Thursday, June 3 and St. Louis, Missouri on Friday, June 4 to meet with local business leaders and discuss the President’s efforts to strengthen the economy and create jobs.

As a result of the President’s tax policy reforms, 865,000 taxpayers in Arkansas will have lower income tax bills in 2004. More than 200,000 Arkansas business taxpayers can use their tax savings to invest in new equipment, hire additional workers, and increase pay.

In Missouri, the President’s tax policy reforms will benefit more than 2 million taxpayers and 440,000 business taxpayers in 2004. Last year, 14,930 new businesses were created in the state.

The following events are open to the media:

**Thursday, June 3, 2004**

Tour of Copy Systems, Inc.10:00 – 10:30 am CDTCopy Systems, Inc.721 West 9th StreetLittle Rock, AR **Media must arrive by 9:00 am and present their media credentials

Roundtable Discussion withAreaBusinessLeaders10:30-11:30 amCDTCopy Systems, Inc.721 West 9th StreetLittle Rock, AR** Media must arrive by 9:00 am and present their media credentials**A brief press availability will occur after the roundtable** Friday, June 4, 2003** Roundtable Discussion with Area Business Leaders8:30am-9:30 am CDTNidusCenter893 North Warson Rd.St. Louis, MO** Media must arrive by 7:15 am and present their media credentials

Tour of NidusCenter9:30 – 10:00 am CDT893 North Warson Rd.St. Louis, MO **Media must arrive by 7:15 am and present their media credentials** A brief press availability will occur after the tour

-30-
