---
title: Secretary Snow Names Bob Werner as New OFAC Director
date: 2004-09-28T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1962
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1962

 

Treasury Secretary John Snow announced today that Robert Werner will be the new Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC). Werner's Directorship becomes official on October 1, 2004.

It is with great enthusiasm that I welcome Bob Werner to the position of OFAC Director. His seasoned know-how will drive the Office's superlative mission, said Snow. Bob's leadership will continue to advance OFAC's critical role in protecting our country from rogue threats.

Werner brings extensive federal, state and private sector experience to this position. He currently serves as the Treasury's Assistant General Counsel for Enforcement and Intelligence. In addition, he previously served as Treasury's Counselor to the Office of the General Counsel and the Chief of Staff at the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN).

Before coming to the Treasury, Werner served in the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel. He also served as a federal prosecutor in the U.S. Attorney's Office in Connecticut, Associate Attorney General in the State of Connecticut, and he headed Connecticut's gaming regulatory agency.

His private sector experience includes work as a partner at Bingham Dana LLP (now Bingham McCutchen) and as an officer at The Phoenix Home Life Mutual Insurance Company (now The Phoenix Companies). Werner is also a former law clerk to Associate Justices Lewis F. Powell, Jr. (retired) and Anthony M. Kennedy.

Werner earned his Juris Doctorate from New York University School of Law, his masters from Columbia University and his bachelors from Amherst College. He graduated with honors from each institution. Werner currently resides in Virginia with his wife and three children.

OFAC is responsible for administering the U.S. Government's 29 sanction programs based on U.S. foreign policy and national security goals against targeted foreign countries, terrorists, international narcotics traffickers and those engaged in activities related to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Werner replaces Richard Newcomb, who announced earlier this month his intent to depart the Treasury after 17 years as OFAC Director.
