---
title: Under Secretary for International Affairs John B. Taylor Remarks at the Cleveland Council on World Affairs Case Western Reserve University Cleveland, Ohio
date: 2004-10-26
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2064
---
*(Archived Content)*

js-2064

**Getting International Economic Development Right:    Is Effective Foreign Assistance Possible?**

Thanks for inviting me to be here at the Cleveland Council on World Affairs. We have heard a lot about foreign policy in recent weeks, but one part of our foreign policy that has received relatively little attention is the international economic part. So I appreciate the opportunity to discuss this important subject with you tonight.

A major goal ofU.S.international economic policy is to increase economic growth and economic stability around the world.Measured by that goal, the international economic policy of the Bush Administration is working very well right now. The world economy is growing at the highest rate in thirty years.No major economy is in recession, and there are no major financial crises. Interest rates in both advanced and emerging market countries are at historically low levels. Inflation throughout the world has declined substantially and is not threatening the global expansion as it has so often in the past. The consensus is that the current global expansion will continue into next year and beyond.And importantly economic growth in emerging market and developing countries is picking up and is expected to reach 6-1/2 percent this year. The growth rate in Africa--at about 4-1/2 percent--this year is still a bit lower than the world average, but it is half again higher than in 2000 and is expected to rise to 5-1/2 percent next year.

But why should it matter to the American people that economic growth and stability are improving around the world?Why should we care about the foreign economic policy of the United States, and whether it is working or can be improved? There are at least three good reasons:

First, a growing world economy creates jobs and higher incomes for Americans through exports. Right here inOhio, for example, exports support 451,000 jobsand have increased by 7.4 percent in 2003.After a decline that began back in 2000, job creation is picking up again inOhio, with employment rising and unemployment declining in September. In the United Statesas a whole 1.9 million jobs have been created in the last 13 months.Another good sign is that Governor Taft's recent trade mission toJapanthis year was 50 percent bigger than in 2000, a reflection on the fact thatJapanis growing again after a lost decade of stagnation.

Second, economic growth in the very poor countries is the key to reducing poverty, andU.S.efforts to increase global growth are therefore part of a long American tradition of providing humanitarian support to improve the well being of people. The truth is that, despite significant progress, three billion people are still living in poverty around the world.Two billion lack adequate sanitation or have no electricity.And a billion do not have safe water to drink.

And these poverty measures bring me to the third reason to care about our foreign economic policy. Reducing poverty and creating jobs throughout the world is an essential part of the war on terror.As we clearly saw inAfghanistanunder the Taliban, terrorism breeds in poor failing states.

It is for all these reasons--economic, humanitarian, security--that the Bush Administration has made international economic policy--and, in particular, the economic development agenda for poor countries--a major part of its national security strategy.

In fact, under President Bush's leadership the Administration has developed a whole new economic development agenda, and the aim is to get economic development right and use foreign aid more effectively. The new development agenda channels more funds to countries that follow pro-growth policies.It insists that resource flows be tied to measurable results. It provides the poorest countries with increased levels of grants, as opposed to loans. And, by publication and greater transparency, it brings attention to objective indicators of pro-growth policies in developing economies.

President Bush has advocated this agenda at the World Bank and other multilateral development banks, and he has put it into practice with the creation of a newU.S.program; the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA). With three billion people still in poverty, it is clear that a new economic development agenda was needed, and it is this economic development agenda that I want to discuss with you tonight.I will focus my remarks on the design and implementation of the Millennium Challenge Account, though many of the same ideas apply to design and implementation of our reform agendas at the multilateral development banks.

**Design**Good international economic policy reforms don't just happen. You need to understand the problem you are trying to solve, come up with a proposed solution, and then get the solution implemented, which may require Congressional approval or international negotiation or both.

In the case of economic development, the problem was clear: too many people around the world were still in poverty because economic growth in many poor countries was too slow.

But why has economic growth been too slow?More and more evidence has been accumulating that there are significant impediments to growth in countries that need it most.

These impediments can be grouped into three areas.

*Poor governance, *including the lack of rule of law or enforceable contracts and the prevalence of corruption, raises the cost of doing business and creates disincentives for the private sector to create high-productivity jobs. For example, it costs $230 to ship cattle from theSahelarea inBurkina Fasoto the coast ofGhanacompared to only $80 to ship cattle all the way fromEuropeto the same point.According to International Livestock Research Institute, which I visited inAfrica, numerous checkpoints and bribes factor into this large cost difference.World Bank[research](http://www.worldbank.org/wbi/governance/pubs/growthgov.html)shows that countries that tackle corruption and improve their rule of law can increase their national incomes by as much as four times in the long term.

*Inadequate education *impedes the development of human capital. Workers without adequate education do not have the skills to take on high-productivity jobs or to adopt new technologies to increase the productivity of the jobs they do have. The workers in a computer services firm I saw inGhanahad good writing, reading, and computation skills and could thereby use the new computer technology to raise their productivity.

*Restrictions on economic transactions *prevent people from buying or selling goods or capital, or adopting new technologies. Lack of openness to international trade, monopolistic state marketing boards, and excessive regulations and red tape are all examples of restrictions that create disincentives for the private sector to invest and innovate so as to boost productivity. For example, until recently the government ofUgandaoperated a marketing board, which controlled most of the buying and selling in the Ugandan green coffee market. The marketing board held down the price paid to farmers for their coffee. After the government eliminated the marketing board, income to coffee farmers increased by nearly a factor of four--from 20 percent of the world price to 70 percent of the world price. So even with the drop in world coffee prices in recent years, many coffee farmers have begun to have higher standards of living.

But there are still many similar restrictions in other markets, in other countries, and between countries. Restrictions on imports into developed countries still reduce the opportunities to create jobs in the export sectors of developing countries. And there are also significant barriers to international trade in developing countries. InUganda, for example, there is a 45 percent tariff on the import of specialty coffee bags needed for shipping more perishable roasted beans. This tariff is a factor in keeping Ugandan firms out of the international roasted coffee market.

For these reasons a key principle of the Bush Administration's approach to increasing growth and reducing poverty is to encourage and assist countries taking actions that remove these impediments to economic growth.Hence, the main principle underlying the MCA: focus economic development assistance on nations that are taking actions to remove impediments in these three areas; when President Bush first announced the Millennium Challenge Account in 2002, he stressed assisting countries that (1) govern justly, (2) invest in people, and (3) encourage economic freedom.Policies promoting these goals underpin successful growth, catalyze private investment, and increase the effectiveness of aid.

Another principle underlying the MCA is that it would establish a partnership in which the developing country, with full participation of its citizens, proposes its own plan.The point is to ask the qualifying countries: What are your development priorities? What are your constraints to growth and to productivity increases? This approach gives countries more ownership of their programs, which greatly increases the lasting support for the policy reforms that underlie the programs.

A third key principle of the MCA is to insist on measurable results in all projects. President Bush has called explicit measurable results throughout his administration, and it has been a theme we have stressed in all our development assistance programs.We must ensure that we measure whether or not we achieve our goals. What gets measured gets done.In this way not only can we determine whether our aid is effective but how we can better target assistance and correct our strategies if they don't work.

The MCA focuses on measuring results by making sure that every MCA contract includes quantitative objectives and clear expected outcomes.We will require a clear strategy for gathering baseline data and measuring progress toward stated results and assessing the reasons for success or failure.We will require disbursements to be conditioned on achieving satisfactory performance on the expected results.Evaluation of results will allow the MCA to incorporate lessons learned into ongoing and future operations.All measurement and evaluation reports, as well as the terms of each compact, will be made public in the US and in the host country.

This MCA is a revolutionary approach to economic development.It emphasizes providing assistance to countries that will use the aid most.We have also stressed this approach at the multilateral development banks.While foreign aid should be available for humanitarian assistance, these countries must take responsibility for increasing economic growth of they are to receive development assistance funds.Aid is not effective when governments are not responsible, not accountable to their people, or not committed to reforms that address governance, social capital, and responsible economic policies.

**Implementation**Given these new MCA principles laid out by President Bush, economists and many other specialists throughout his administration--Treasury, State, USAID, CEA, OMB, USTR--went to work to make them work in practice.We focused on choosing indicators, operations, and measuring results.**The Indicators**We had to develop quantitative measures of good policy that would be used to assess countries' qualification for assistance. We stressed that the indicators had to be based on an objective and transparent assessment of their policy performance.By giving complete access to the information countries needed to qualify, the MCA would help give economic leaders the incentive and direction to develop good policies.

We consulted with people in the multilateral development banks, academic policy institutes, the private sector, and non-profit organizations.In the end several indicators were chosen in each of the three categories:6 in governing justly, 4 in investing in people and 6 in encouraging economic freedom--a total of 16 indicators. We insisted that all this information be publicly available. The list of 16 indicators is shown on a few charts I brought forGhanaandNiger--scanning through these charts give you a good sense of the robustness of the indicators.To qualify countries should do better than the median on half of the indicators in all three categories, and perform above the median on control of corruption.

Even before funding has been distributed to the selected countries, the country performance on the individual indicators has had tremendous impacts.For example, one of the indicators is a measure of the days it takes to start a business in a country.This indicator is something concrete and tangible that countries were able to improve upon almost immediately.Benin,Bolivia,Madagascar,Mongolia,NicaraguaandSri Lankaall improved their days to start a business indicator in the run up to the selection of countries for 2004.

## The Corporation

Another essential implementation task was the creation of a Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) to carry out the operations of the MCA.The MCC was to be separate from cabinet agencies and have a degree of independence with a Board of Governors consisting of several cabinet members and outside representatives.

I am happy to say the MCC has now been authorized and funded by congress. You can go to their website[www.mcc.gov](http://www.mcc.gov/)to learn more and to look at the indicators.Sixteen countries have been chosen to participate in the first round.

## The Measuring of Results

Making the measurable results concept work in practice is not easy and is perhaps the most challenging part of development assistance. You may be wondering what exactly we mean by measuring results?When the Department of Transportation inOhiobuilds a highway, they should be able to answer whether it helps relieve traffic congestion or creates a more efficient way to get to an airport or urban center? How much will this highway cost to build or to maintain?How long will it take to be built?

The same should be true for international development assistance. I can give many examples from my own experience. ConsiderAfghanistanfor example. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) provided a $15 million grant toAfghanistanto rehabilitate a large portion of the 100-kilometerKandaharto Spin Boldak road, one of the country's major links with its neighbors.Despite its dilapidated condition, some 4,000 vehicles use the road daily, and the Spin-Boldak area is heavily congested.To get this done expeditiously we insisted on ambitious timelines with measurable results. To emphasize the importance I traveled toManilathe home of the ADB as well as toAfghanistan. Our executive director at the ADB played an essential role. The ADB wasn't just building a road; they were providing increased access to what was a major route betweenAfghanistan, its neighbors and their markets for goods and services.I am happy to say that the project has been completed.It has also reduced travel time from Spin Boldak toKandaharto 1 hours, down from 3-4 hours.It is not just about how much money went into building a road, it was also about how measuring results got the job done on time to make a difference for Afghanistan.

Another example is an education project inKenya.Kenyafaces the challenge of increasing attendance in schools and improving completion rates and the quality of the education.To accomplish the project goals the Ministry of Education disbursed money to the school districts to spend on textbooks, teacher's guides and training, financial management systems, hiring guidance counselors, and innovating new programs and activities for the students.A common practice at the schools, I witnessed, is to put on the blackboard the amounts of aid given to them by different donors.The blackboard tabulations serve as a tracking mechanism to see where the money had been spent, and what portions remained. This was an excellent example of results measurement, as I could see how much was spent on textbooks, how many textbooks were bought, and the students with the textbooks in hand. Not only is the process transparent, but it also encourages project ownership, as the parents and school board are involved in deciding the types of text books to buy for the school.The communities are also able to track their schools progress towards meeting the overall goals of the project and to see whether the money spent on textbooks and training is actually producing the desired results.

Americans are by nature a generous people but they want to see results from their funds that are devoted to development, and their support for providing foreign assistance will only increase if those results are demonstrated in a convincing and straightforward manner.  By measuring concrete results, we can focus our efforts on what really matters: helping poor people around the world escape from poverty and lead better lives.

The approach helps us cut through bureaucratic layers, ignore non-essentials, and concentrate on development problems that must be solved. It is a way to maximize the benefits of our funds.

**Conclusion**I think the record demonstrates that we have made real progress in our international development assistance. I can say that this is truly an exciting time for those of us who have been working on international development issues in the Bush Administration. In 2001 President Bush announced his new grants and measurable results initiatives. Regarding the grants he explained that he aimed to not only drop the debt of poor countries but also to stop the debt.In 2002 he announced the Millennium Challenge Account--which I have focused on here tonight--saying the bottom line for us, and for our developing country partners, is how much development they are achieving.Now the grants and measurable results systems are operational at the World Bank and the MCA is up and running too. And this year the World Bank issued its annual development report and focused it entirely on economic growth as the key way to reduce poverty.

These international development reforms have the potential to provide profound and far-reaching benefits for recipient countries around the world.The policy reforms enacted in poor countries can provide opportunities to address key bottlenecks to development, to increase international trade and private capital inflow, and to ultimately help their citizens who will benefit from greater economic and political freedom.

-30-
