---
title: 'Treasury''s Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Speaks at Annual Meeting of Georgia Consortium for Per Financial Literacy'
date: 2004-12-02
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2124
---
*(Archived Content)*



JS-2124

** **

Treasury's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education, Dan Iannicola, Jr., today delivered the keynote address at the annual meeting of the Georgia Consortium for Personal Financial Literacy, the Georgia Jump$tart affiliate, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. Iannicola addressed over 100 participants representing nonprofit, private and government organizations focused on improving financial education in Georgia. He presented the group with Treasury's Eight Elements for a Successful Financial Education Program, which can help grass roots organizations improve and expand financial education in the state.



Iannicola encouraged the members of the Georgia Consortium for Personal Financial Literacy to continue their efforts. By partnering with one another you're improving financial education in Georgia and you're getting the right information, to the right people, at the right time, said Iannicola. These organizations you represent are putting individuals and whole communities on the path to financial security.



The Georgia Consortium for Personal Financial Literacy works with businesses and state and local governments to implement policies and practices that encourage wise personal finance decision-making. Some of the founding member organizations include the Community Foundation for Greater Atlanta, Consumer Credit Counseling Service, Georgia Council on Economic Education, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and Junior Achievement of Georgia. The Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy is a non-profit organization that seeks to improve the personal financial literacy of young adults.



The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).

* *  

**REPORTS**


- [Iannicolas presentation of Treasurys Eight Elements for a Successful Financial Education Program](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/120204diatlpresentation.pdf)
