---
title: Treasury Designates Castro-Controlled Travel Agency
date: 2004-03-17
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1240
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1240

The Department of the Treasury took further action today in its crackdown against travel agencies that promote illegal travel to Cuba by U.S. citizens by designating Hola Sun Holidays Limited, which is controlled by Fidel Castro and his regime.

Castro’s recent decision to put the Cuban military directly in control of the travel industry highlights again that travel-related dollars spent in Cuba are swept directly into the regime's coffers – while the Cuban people are left starving for freedom and economic liberty, said Treasury’s Deputy Assistant Secretary Juan Zarate, Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes. As long as we allow money to flow unabated into the hands of the Cuban government, we allow Castro to fund the atrocities of his dictatorship and perpetuate the oppression of the Cuban people.

Today’s designation blocks all property of Hola Sun Holidays Limited held by persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction. Additionally, this action prohibits persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction from engaging in any transactions with this entity unless authorized by OFAC.

Hola Sun Holidays Limited is a travel agency owned by Cimex and is associated with Caribe Sol – both of which Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) designated as Specially Designated Nationals (SDNs) of Cuba on February 9, 2004. Hola Sun and Caribe Sol share a webpage and openly state they are proud to be part of Havantur, another SDN of Cuba owned by Cimex.

OFAC action today is in furtherance of President Bush’s October 2003 initiative to strengthen enforcement of U.S. laws prohibiting travel-related transactions with Cuba. Stepped up enforcement will help keep travel-related dollars out of Castro’s hands.

Hola Sun Holidays Limited provides easy access to U.S. individuals traveling to Cuba. U.S. law enforcement officials have intercepted unauthorized travelers whose tour packages were purchased through this travel agency, which uses the Internet to advertise and sell Cuban tourism to the U.S. public.

Entity: **Hola Sun Holidays Limited**146 West Beaver Creek Road, Richmond Hill, Ontario L4B 1C2, Canada[CUBA]Background:For more information on the February 9, 2004 blocking and designation of Caribe Sol and Havantur, both owned by Cimex, please visit[http://www.treasury.gov/press/releases/js1161.htm](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/js1161).

-30-
