---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education, Dan Iannicola, Jr. Addresses Wisconsin Teachers and School Administrators at Personal Finance Training Session and Leads Financial Education Roundtable in Madison
date: 2004-08-02T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1822
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

js-1822

 

Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. today addressed teachers and school administrators, opening the third week of the 2004 Wisconsin Institute of Financial and Economic Education, sponsored by the Wisconsin Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy.

Our students need to be taught the basics of saving, budgeting and managing credit in order to make informed decisions on how to pay for college, finance a home or start a small business. A solid financial education is vital for our young people if they are to share in America's great opportunities, said Iannicola. Through your work here and in your classrooms, you're making sure those opportunities are not a privilege of a few, but available to everyone.

The institute's personal finance program trains teachers and administrators on money management and personal finance skills. Program participants can take newly acquired personal finance skills and integrate them into lessons in social studies, economics, math, business and consumer science classes. While in Madison, Iannicola also led the Wisconsin Financial Literacy Roundtable hosted by the Credit Union National Association (CUNA). The roundtable focused on best practices for improving financial literacy.

At the training, Iannicola thanked teachers for their commitment to improving financial education in their schools and shared creative approaches for selecting the best financial education programs. He also provided the participants with suggestions on how they can integrate financial education into existing curricula for maximum impact on student learning and retention. At the roundtable, Iannicola recognized the Wisconsin financial and education communities for their efforts to improve financial literacy in the state.

The Wisconsin Institute of Financial and Economic Education, offers teachers and administrators a choice of three training sessions. The sessions focus on entrepreneurship, saving, investing and insurance, as well as credit and money management. The Wisconsin Jump$tart is an affiliate of the National Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy. Headquartered in Washington, D.C., the National Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy was first convened in 1995 and consists of over 200 organizations focused on improving the financial literacy of America's youth.

Representatives from financial institutions, state government, academic, nonprofit and private sectors also participated in today's CUNA sponsored Wisconsin Financial Literacy Roundtable. The participants included: Philip Heckman, CUNA & Affiliates; David Mancl, Wisconsin Department of Financial Institutions and Wisconsin Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy; Richard Entenmann, Asset Builders of America; Jim Guenther, Economics Wisconsin; Professor Lew Mandell, MoneySKILL, National Jump$tart Coalition and State University of New York at Buffalo; Chris Olson, Wisconsin Credit Union League; Jodi Owens, Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development; Joseph Saari, Precision Information, LLC; Sharon Strom, Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction; Bill Wilcox, CBM Credit Education Foundation, Inc.; Bob Wynn, Financial Education Consultant; Jim Hanson, Center for Personal Finance, CUNA; Mike Miller, Association Services, CUNA; Michelle Cunningham, News Now, CUNA; Ann Peterson, Credit Union Magazine, CUNA; and Kim Kindschi, Wisconsin Bankers Association. CUNA, a national not-for-profit trade group, is governed by America's credit unions and works with related organizations to provide products and services to credit unions.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education. Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning. The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States. For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://home.treasury.gov/about/organizational-structure/offices/Pages/--Office-of-Financial-Education-and-Financial-Access.aspx).

-30-
