---
title: Secretary Snow to Visit Wall Street
date: 2004-08-03T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1833
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Chief Will Applaud the Women and Men of the Financial Services Industry and Discuss Efforts to Strengthen and Protect Our Critical Financial Infrastructure

U.S. Treasury Secretary John W. Snow will visit New York City on Wednesday, August 4, to spend time with the employees of the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and thank them for their commitment to keeping the nation's financial systems strong during this period of increased threat level.

Thanks to the workers at NYSE, Citibank and many other entities, our nation's financial markets and financial institutions continue to operate normally. I want the financial community to know how much their commitment to their work is valued, Secretary Snow said. Their dedication is the reason our financial system is so strong and resilient, and a reminder of why people around the world rightly have so much confidence in U.S. financial markets.

The Secretary also plans to discuss the coordinated efforts of the government and private sector to keep our financial infrastructure strong and functioning, now and in the event of any potential market disruptions. The Treasury Department has been and is currently in close cooperation with the Department of Homeland Security, other federal, state and local financial regulators, the international financial institutions, and the private sector to strengthen and protect our critical financial infrastructure, Secretary Snow said. The level of cooperation is evident in the success of this week's response to the increased terror alert.

The following event is open to the press, which must wear media credentials or ID:

**Secretary Snow tours the NYSE **Wednesday August 4, 20041:00pm** IMPORTANT:**Media interested in covering Secretary Snow MUST contact Jolene Libretto 212-656-2705 in order to obtain entry into the building and must arrive ½ hour in advance at the security checkpoint at Exchange & Broad Streets.

- 30 -
