---
title: “Launching the Millennium Challenge Account in Africa” John B. Taylor Under Secretary for International Affairs U.S. Department of the Treasury Institute of Economic Affairs Accra, Ghana May 31, 2004
date: 2004-05-31
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1699
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-1699

  

Let me start by thanking Minister Osafo Maafo for his introductory remarks, Ambassador Yates for all her work in facilitating my visit and Dr. Mensah for giving me the opportunity to speak to you about the Millennium Challenge Account or MCA. It is quite fitting that I talk about the MCA here at the Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA) which, since its inception 15 years ago, has dedicated itself to strengthening Ghana's market economy and developing a more democratic, free and open Ghanaian society.I will focus my remarks on the economic rationale behind the MCA, how it reflects the Administration's overall approach to economic development, and how Ghana fits into the picture.



Today there are more than three billion people – half the human race – who live on less than $2 US dollars per day.Every year some 3 million people die for lack of immunization, 1 million die from malaria, 3 million die from water-related diseases, and 2 million die from exposure to stove smoke inside their own homes.  In addition, HIV/AIDS has ravaged the populations of developing nations, particularly here in Africa, killing 3 million people in 2003 alone.More than one billion people don't have safe water to drink, two billion have no electricity, and another 2 billion lack adequate sanitation.



Under President Bush's leadership we are pursuing a new economic growth agenda aimed at reducing poverty around the world.  The MCA is a central part of this agenda.  It operates on the principle that aid is more likely to promote economic growth and raise living standards in countries that are pursuing sound political, economic and social policies.  That is, in countries that are ruling justly, investing in their people, and promoting economic freedom.The selection of the 16 MCA-eligible countries, of which Ghana is one, was based on an objective and transparent assessment of their policy performance on 16 indicators that are key to increasing economic growth.



**Removing Impediments to Productivity Growth**



Evidence has shown that increased economic growth and sustainable poverty reduction can only be achieved via productivity growth.  To achieve productivity growth, one must increase the labor output per unit of time with the skills and tools available. The higher the rate of productivity growth, the faster poverty can decline.



Productivity depends on two things: capital investment per worker and the level of technology. If there are no impediments to the flow and accumulation of capital and technology, then countries that are behind in productivity should have a higher productivity growth rate.  Examples such as South Korea, Chile, and Botswana demonstrate that higher productivity growth can lead to stronger economic growth and higher per capita income.  However, many of the poorest nations still have had low and stagnant productivity and income, and they are not catching up.   More and more evidence has been accumulating that this is due to significant impediments to investment and the adoption of technology.



These impediments can be grouped into three areas. First, poor governance -- the lack of rule of law or enforceable contracts and the prevalence of corruption -- creates disincentives to invest, start up new firms, and expand existing firms with high-productivity jobs. Second, weak social sectors impede the development of human capital. Third, restrictive economic environments prevent people from trading goods and services or adopting new technologies and stagnant productivity and growth.



**Ghana Results**



In all three areas, governing justly, investing in people, and encouraging economic freedom, Ghana scored quite well compared to other countries with a per capita income of $1,415 or less.Let me just briefly go over the indicators and the results for Ghana.



In the ruling justly category, there are six indicators covering (1) civil liberties, (2) political rights, (3) voice and accountability, (4) government effectiveness, (5) rule of law, and (6) control of corruption.In all six of these indicators Ghana scored well above the median, and it scored particularly high on government effectiveness, which is an aggregate index of such items as the provision of quality public services and competent and independent civil servants.This is testimony to Ghana's efforts to put in place a permanent system of democratic and effective governance and adherence to the rule of law.



We are particularly encouraged by anti-corruption efforts including the enactment last December of the Public Procurement Act which provides for transparency and fair competition, clear decision-making and record maintenance, and mechanisms for enforcement of the rules and adequate grievance procedures.These are the type of microeconomic reforms that we believe are essential for increased competitiveness.



In the investing in people category, there are four indicators covering (1) Public expenditure on health as a percent of GDP, (2) Immunization rate for DPT and measles, (3) Total public expenditure on primary education as a percent of GDP, and (4) the primary completion rate.Here again Ghana scored very well compared to the other MCA candidates, demonstrating the country's commitment to improving the lives of its people.The data do show that there was a drop in immunization rates in recent years so this is something to keep careful track of.



Within the encouraging economic freedom category, the six indicators are regulatory quality, country credit rating, days to start a business, trade policy, inflation, and fiscal policy.For Ghana, the scores on these indicators have not been as robust as in the other two categories though the government has taken steps to address weaknesses.For example, while the authorities have made progress in reducing the number of days to start a business (down from 129 days in 2002 to 85 days in 2003), this figure is still very high and is a true deterrent from doing business in Ghana.The government has developed a private sector development strategy that will serve as the basis for improvements.Low deficits and prudent fiscal policy are another lynchpin of the MCA criteria.While spending and inflation levels in Ghana have historically been quite volatile, the government has done a good job of maintaining fiscal discipline and we applaud the President for pledging to maintain this stance during this election year.Inflation has come down considerably from its high point of 30% last year, and now is expected to be in the single digits by year-end.Sensible implementation of fiscal and monetary policies no doubt played a strong part in Ghana receiving a B+ rating from Standard & Poors last year.We acknowledge that it can be difficult to maintain fiscal discipline in an election year, so if President Kufour and his team can accomplish this goal, they will have reversed a long and destabilizing trend in Ghana.



As Ghanaians well know, subsidies have become a way of life in Ghana.Each year, the government spends some billions of cedis on subsidies, many of which are not well targeted.Harnessing these funds for more direct investments in people could have a dramatic impact on the welfare of Ghanaians.This is an area where we hope there can be some improvement.To help ensure continued MCA eligibility, positive review from the credit rating agencies, and positive relations with the international financial institutions, we urge the authorities to continue to ensure fiscal and monetary discipline.We encourage the government to take additional steps to improve the investment climate, particularly for foreign investors, by quickly resolving outstanding investment disputes.The private sector will be concerned if the government appears to be impeding into private sector investments – this needs to be carefully monitored, as the government needs to let the private sector be the driver for economic growth.



**Next Steps**



Since this past Monday, teams of Millennium Challenge Corporation officials and staff have begun traveling to each of the 16 countries selected to be eligible to submit proposals for MCA assistance.One of the teams will be in Ghana in the next few weeks.The purpose of these visits will be to discuss the MCA and begin serious dialogues with countries, which will lead to the development of program proposals and ultimately to the negotiation and finalization of Country Compacts.But the MCC's acceptance of a country's proposal is not guaranteed.Only those proposals that contain quality programs with a strong likelihood of success will be accepted.



What types of programs should the Ghana proposal contain?That is what Ghana will need to tell us. In a broad sense, we expect it to focus on programs that will stimulate transformational change within countries resulting in increased economic growth.It could be include investments in agriculture, education, private sector and financial systems development, legal and regulatory reform, and enabling infrastructure.The sixteen countries selected will themselves be responsible for identifying their priorities, outlining the programs to achieve them, and submitting proposals reflecting these choices.In each case, we would expect these choices to reflect a process of broad consultation within the country.The MCC has posted proposal guidance for countries on its website if you are interested ([www.mcc.gov](http://www.mcc.gov/)).



**Measuring Results.   **



One of the aspects of the MCA that I personally attach tremendous importance to is the emphasis on measuring results.I strongly believe the success of any foreign aid program requires that we measure results.What gets measured gets done.This is a core component of the Administration's development strategy and is one that we have pushed in the Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs).  For example, the United States made part of its financial commitment to the IDA-13 replenishment in the form of an incentive contribution that calls for making progress towards a set of development indicators in health, education, and private sector development.  The agreement also called for the initiation of a performance measurement system that will develop ultimately into a common set of outcome indicators that can be compared across countries.



The MCA furthers this focus on measuring results by making sure that every MCA contract states in quantitative terms the expected outcomes. We will require a clear strategy for gathering baseline data and measuring progress toward stated results and assessing the reasons for success and failure. We will require projects to be structured in a way that steps up or cuts back funding contingent on achieving results.  Evaluation of results will allow the MCA to incorporate lessons learned into ongoing and future operations.  All measurement and evaluation reports, as well as the terms of each contract, will be made public in the United States and in the host country.



**Conclusion**



This is an exciting time for those of us who have been part of the establishment of the Millennium Challenge Account.It has been a little over two years since President Bush announced this initiative and it is now a reality. While it has not been easy to get it done, we firmly believe our efforts will prove to be worth all the hard work that went into it.This is because the MCA has the potential to provide profound and far-reaching benefits for recipient countries around the world.The policy reforms enacted in MCA countries can provide opportunities for their citizens to also benefit from both increased international trade and private capital inflows, from the growth of their domestic economics, and from greater economic and political freedom.These reforms can have a much greater impact than whatever MCC itself achieves.



Having been designated as an MCA eligible country, Ghana can and should continue to demonstrate that it has the right mix of political, economic and social conditions to attract investment, increase economic growth, and improve the livelihood of its citizens.
