---
title: The Honorable John W. Snow Remarks as Prepared for Delivery Following the Tour of Infocision Akron, OH
date: 2004-08-05T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1842
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1842

 

I'm delighted to be home in Ohio today, and to be visiting Infocision. The employees here are doing great work, and I applaud the management of Infocision for their terrific relationship with the local community, particularly their partnership with the Akron Community and TechnicalCollege.

The folks here at Infocision understand that Community Colleges are a critical partner to the business community when it comes to finding skilled employees. And Community Colleges tend to understand that workers need training that matches up with actual jobs in their home town.

The more we can match up workers with good skills, and skilled workers with good jobs and employers who need them, the more American families will move forward, economically.

When community colleges and job-creators work together, people find good work more quickly and businesses get the skilled employees they need. This is particularly important in more rural areas where the variety of job opportunities is more limited. A worker really needs to have the skills needed in his or her geographic area, and most Americans are within driving distance of a community college.

That's why the President is dedicated to promoting and helping our community colleges, and making them a more integral part of our nation's workforce investment system.

Because nothing is more important here in Ohio than getting people back to work, and nothing is more important to families all over the country.

I know that bad economic times hit Ohio hard. And the effort to get your economy on solid footing, to a place where you can expand, grow and create more jobs, is ongoing.

I am pleased to report that our national economy has found that footing, and it is expanding and creating jobs. Small businesses are hiring, and they are optimistic. Consumer optimism is high, too… and these are both indicators that bode very well for continued economic growth and job creation.

But this is little comfort to Ohioans who lost a job during the economic downturn. Comfort can only come when a new job is found. Nearly 18,000 jobs have been added in Ohio so far this year, but that's not enough. Making sure that more jobs are created has therefore been the top domestic priority of President Bush's administration.

Job growth was the goal of the tax cuts. The tax relief paid particular attention to small businesses – America's job-creators. Coupled with sound monetary policy and an unwavering commitment to free, open trade have helped create an environment nationwide in which new jobs could be produced.

Here in Ohio, more than 4.4 million taxpayers will have lower income tax bills in 2004 thanks to the President's tax cuts. Nearly 860,000 Ohio business taxpayers will be able to use their tax savings to invest in their employees' pay or benefits, the purchase of new equipment, or hiring of new staff.

Raising your taxes right now would be terrible news for our economy, and for every Ohioan who seeks work.

We need to keep the burden as light as we can on small businesses and individuals if we want to encourage the creativity and innovation that leads to job creation.

I am optimistic that times will get better in Ohio. You will not be left behind; the U.S. economy is too strong for that. We're going to keep growing as a country, and Ohioans will be part of that growth.

The most powerful elements of our economy are our small-business owners and entrepreneurs, our outstanding workforce and the simple fact that we operate as a free market. We are fortunate that our economy is more open, flexible, adaptive and resilient than any other in the world. And as long as we continue on the path of freedom, making sure that individuals and entrepreneurs have an environment in which they can work and grow, our best days will remain ahead of us, all across this great country.

Thank you so much for having me here today.
