---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education, Dan Iannicola, Jr. Promotes Financial Education in Iowa by Recognizing Model Program and Visiting High School
date: 2004-05-13T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1687
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1687

 

Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. today presented a Certificate of Recognition to the John Lewis Community Services for its efforts in providing financial education to low-income and homeless individuals in Davenport, Iowa. John Lewis Community Services staff, volunteers, and clients also participated in the event.

“John Lewis Community Services does a great job of meeting its clients’ short term needs, like food, shelter and employment, but also goes the extra step of helping with their long term needs through its financial education program,” said Iannicola. “The program first rescues and then rehabilitates its clients by giving them a real hope of financial independence. The staff here uses financial education to help clients help themselves in a way that preserves their clients’ dignity and self respect.”

Founded in 1989, John Lewis Community Services provides hospitality and support to those in need and collaborates with the greater community to challenge the root causes of poverty by focusing on community development activities. Since April of 2003, over 100 individuals have received financial education through a variety of programs and services that John Lewis Community Services provides; and those in emergency shelter or individuals looking to purchase a first home, have received financial education services. The service currently uses the NCRC curriculum, which is modified to meet the individual needs of each participant.

While in Iowa, Iannicola also visited Jane Cox’s class at Davenport Central High School. Family Credit Union representative Kris Lundquist used the*Game of Life *curriculum to teach the financial education lesson. Central High School is one of 269 high schools in Iowa using the*High School Financial Planning Program*, a National Endowment for Financial Education program. Through volunteers such as the Family Credit Union, the program provides teens with a greater understanding of, and ability to manage, their personal finances in the areas of goal setting, budgeting and saving.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, homeownership and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://home.treasury.gov/about/organizational-structure/offices/Pages/--Office-of-Financial-Education-and-Financial-Access.aspx).

-30-
