---
title: 'April 15th Tax Day Reminder: Tax Relief Reinvigorated The U.S. Economy And Is Driving Job Creation'
date: 2004-04-09T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1317
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

js-1317

President Bush’s jobs and growth tax relief plan has helped millions of American families and businesses, has reinvigorated the U.S. economy, and is driving job creation.

**America’s economy is strong and getting stronger.**

- Without the President’s needed tax relief plan, by the end of this year real GDP would be about 3.5 to 4 percent lower.
- Instead, in the last half of 2003 we witnessed the strongest economic growth in nearly 20 years.
- The strength of the economy’s underlying fundamentals indicates economic activity will continue above the historical average.

** More Americans are going to work and more Americans are staying on the job.**

- If not for the President’s timely economic growth measures, by the end of this year the unemployment rate would be as much as 1.6 percentage points higher and as many as 3 million fewer Americans would be working.
- But because of the President’s commitment to strengthen the environment for job creation, and the positive impact of his tax relief measures, over three-quarters of a million new jobs were created over the past seven months, 308,000 in March alone.
- At 5.7 percent, the unemployment rate remains lower than the average of the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s, and far below its peak of 6.3 percent in June of 2003.
- Over the past year the unemployment rate has fallen in 45 of the 50 states.
- Weekly first-time claims for unemployment insurance have dropped to the lowest point in over three years and continuing jobless claims are at a 32-month low. [Chart attached]
- According to one private sector measure, layoffs in the first three months of this year were the lowest in four years, suggesting continued improvement in the job market.
** Americans are keeping more of their hard-earned money.**
- Real after-tax incomes are up 10 percent since December of 2000 and are substantially above levels following the last recession.
- Buoyed by the return of the stock market and strong home values, household wealth is at a record high. After five consecutive quarterly increases, household net worth is up by almost $6 trillion, reaching over $44 trillion at the end of last year.
** The housing market is showing broad-based strength.**
- Despite predictions by some that the tax relief plan would cause interest rates to rise, interest rates are near a 40-year low.
- Homeownership is at an all-time high – 68.6 percent – with substantial gains among minority homeowners.
- After posting record breaking numbers last year, new and used home sales continue at high levels.
- New home construction remains strong after hitting its highest level in 25 years in 2003.
- More Americans have refinanced in the past three years than in the entire 1990s combined, allowing millions of U.S. families to reduce their monthly mortgage payments.
- Additionally, the amount of cash Americans are getting out of their homes has set a record high the past three years, averaging over $100 billion a year since 2001 – compared to an annual average of $23 billion through much of the 1990s.

***America has a choice: It can continue to grow the economy and create new jobs as the President's policies are doing; or it can raise taxes on American families and small businesses, hurting economic recovery and future job creation.* REPORTS **

- [Initial Claims for Unemployment Graph](https://home.treasury.gov/press/releases/reports/js1317graph.jpg)
