---
title: U.S. International Reserve Position
date: 2004-04-29
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/2004429141344206
---
*(Archived Content)*



The Treasury Department today released U.S. reserve assets data for the latest week. As indicated in this table, U.S. reserve assets totaled $83,643 million as of the end of that week, compared to $83,345 million as of the end of the prior week.

**I. Official U.S. Reserve Assets***(in US millions)*

**
TOTAL
**

**
April 9, 2004
****

**

**
April 16, 2004
****
**

**83,345**

**83,643**

1. Foreign Currency Reserves1

**Euro**

**Yen**

**TOTAL**

**Euro**

**Yen**

**TOTAL**

a. Securities

9,315

14,776

24,091

9,236

14,606

23,842

*Of which, issuer head-quartered in the U.S.*

 

 

0

 

 

0

b. Total deposits with:

*b.i**. Other central banks and BIS*

12,191

2,969

15,160

12,118

2,935

15,053

*b.ii**. Banks head-quartered in the U.S.*

 

 

0

 

 

0

b.ii. Of which, banks located abroad

 

 

0

 

 

0

*b.iii**. Banks head-quartered outside the U.S.*

 

 

0

 

 

0

b.iii. Of which, banks located in the U.S.

 

 

0

 

 

0

2. IMF Reserve Position2

 

 

21,463

 

 

21,245

3. Special Drawing Rights (SDRs)2

 

 

12,586

 

 

12,458

4. Gold Stock3

 

 

11,045

 

 

11,045

5. Other Reserve Assets

 

 

0

 

 

0

 

**II. Predetermined Short-Term Drains on Foreign Currency Assets**

 

**
April 9, 2004
****

**

**
April 16, 2004
****
**

**Euro**

**Yen**

**TOTAL**

**Euro**

**Yen**

**TOTAL**

1. Foreign currency loans and securities

 

 

0

 

 

0

2. Aggregate short and long positions in forwards and futures in foreign currencies vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar:

*2.a. Short positions*

 

 

0

 

 

0

*2.b. Long positions*

 

 

0

 

 

0

3. Other

 

 

0

 

 

0

 

**III. Contingent Short-Term Net Drains on Foreign Currency Assets**

 

**
April 9, 2004
****

**

**
April 16, 2004
****
**

**Euro**

**Yen**

**TOTAL**

**Euro**

**Yen**

**TOTAL**

1. Contingent liabilities in foreign currency

 

 

0

 

 

0

1.a. Collateral guarantees on debt due within 1 year

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.b. Other contingent liabilities

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Foreign currency securities with embedded options

 

 

0

 

 

0

3.Undrawn, unconditional credit lines

 

 

0

 

 

0

*3.a. With other central banks*

 

 

 

 

 

 

*3.b. With banks and other financial institutions*

 

 

 

 

 

 

*Head-quartered in the U.S.*

 

 

 

 

 

 

*3.c. With banks and other financial institutions*

 

 

 

 

 

 

*Head-quartered outside the U.S.*

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Aggregate short and long positions of options in foreign

 

 

 

 

 

 

Currencies vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar

 

 

0

 

 

0

*4.a. Short positions*

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.a.1. Bought puts

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.a.2. Written calls

 

 

 

 

 

 

*4.b. Long positions*

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.b.1. Bought calls

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.b.2. Written puts

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

**Notes:**

1/ Includes holdings of the Treasury's Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF) and the Federal Reserve's System Open Market Account (SOMA), valued at current market exchange rates. Foreign currency holdings listed as securities reflect marked-to-market values, and deposits reflect carrying values.Foreign Currency Reserves for the latest week may be subject to revision.Foreign Currency Reserves for the prior week are final.

2/ The items, "2. IMF Reserve Position" and "3. Special Drawing Rights (SDRs)," are based on data provided by the IMF and are valued in dollar terms at the official SDR/dollar exchange rate for the reporting date. The entries for the latest week reflect any necessary adjustments, including revaluation, by the U.S. Treasury to IMF data for the prior month end.

3/ Gold stock is valued monthly at $42.2222 per fine troy ounce.
