---
title: 'ATSB Decision on United Air Lines'' Request for Reconsideration'
date: 2004-06-28T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1753
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free Adobe® Acrobat® Reader®. *

js-1753

 

**Michael Kestenbaum Executive Director ** June 28, 2004

Mr. Frederic F. BraceExecutive Vice Presidentand Chief Financial OfficerUnited Air Lines, Inc.1200 East Algonquin RoadElk Grove Township,IL60007

Re: Request for Reconsideration

Dear Mr. Brace:

We have received the materials submitted to the Air Transportation Stabilization Board (the Board) onJune 22, 2004, by United Air Lines, Inc. (United).  In the materials, United requests reconsideration by the Board of itsJune 17, 2004, denial of United's application (the Application) for a federal loan guarantee under the Air Transportation Safety and System Stabilization Act, Pub. L. No. 107-42, 115 Stat. 230 (the Act) and the regulations promulgated thereunder, 14 CFR Part 1300.

All members of the Board and Board staff have carefully considered the additional financial information recently provided by United.  As noted in the June 17thdecision,the Board concluded that granting the loan guarantee is not a necessary part of maintaining a safe, efficient, and viable commercial aviation system in the United States, as required by the Act.The Board noted the positive steps the company has taken since entering bankruptcy in 2002 to lower its costs, strengthen its competitive position, and improve its governance structure.  Moreover, the Board believes that airline credit markets have been improving since late 2001 and 2002, … increasing the likelihood of United succeeding without a loan guarantee.

After carefully considering the additional financial information submitted as part of United's request for reconsideration, the Board determined that this information does not alter in a material manner the rationales underlying the Board's June 17thdecision.Given these circumstances, all members of the Board join in the decision to deny United's request for reconsideration, and the Board's June 17thdecision stands.The Board will not accept any further submissions from United with respect to the Application.

                           

Sincerely,Michael Kestenbaum

** REPORTS**

- [Copy of Letter to Frederic F. Brace](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/letter_to_frederic_brace_june282004.pdf)
