---
title: Statement by John B. Taylor, Under Secretary for International Affairs United States Department of the Treasury at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Finance Ministers Meeting Santiago, Chile September 2, 2004
date: 2004-09-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1889
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

js-1889

 

Good afternoon.

This has been a very successful Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Finance Ministers' meeting. I want to thank our hosts, the Government of Chile and the Finance Minister of Chile, Nicolas Eyzaguirre, for the hospitality we have received this week.

During our meetings today I was happy to report on the success of the U.S. economy. The U.S. economy has responded to President Bush's economic reforms to post strong levels of economic growth, productivity growth, and continued job creation in a low inflation, low interest rate environment. The United States has been a leading engine of growth in the global economy and I expect this to continue.

This is a period of remarkable success for the world economy and especially for those in the Asia-Pacific region. The world economy is growing, and growth among APEC economies, while balanced and widespread, is expanding at its fastest rate in thirty years.

The strong economic recovery in Japan is most welcome. China´s growth has slowed modestly, but still remains quite strong. Inflation is under control throughout the region. Interest rate spreads are down. There have been no major foreign exchange or balance of payments crises. Contagion is down. Volatility is down among currencies in economies with flexible exchange rate regimes. The progress made recently in moving the Doha Round of international trade negotiations forward is valuable. I believe that it is very important that the new round should include high quality offers in financial services.

Our success comes as the result of improvements we all have made in economic policies -- more prudent and sustainable fiscal policies, monetary policies focused on price stability, and increased openness to international trade and capital flows. It is notable that the ministers encouraged pro-growth macroeconomic policies and increased financial flexibility.

The prospects for a long global expansion are very good. Better monetary policies have played an important role in the global economic success. In the 1980´s the U.S. Federal Reserve shifted to a monetary policy more focused on price stability. This led to two of the longest expansions in U.S. history. Chile and New Zealand have followed a policy of inflation targeting with flexible exchange rate regimes, and many other countries are following suit. This focus has helped to reduce boom and bust cycles. As more economies move toward similar monetary policies focused on price stability and flexible exchange rates, I am confident that this will lead to long global economic expansions.

Other economic reforms have also been helpful. Greater transparency – a major effort by the IMF – contributes to better policies and better markets. The communiqué recognizes the improvements in international economic policy, particularly the inclusion of collective action clauses in external sovereign borrowing, and the establishment of these clauses as a market standard.

In the communiqué, I was particularly pleased that support for the move to more flexible currency regimes was expressed. The international economic system works best in an environment characterized by free trade, the free flow of capital, and currencies set in open, competitive markets. I believe we are moving closer to achieving this goal.

The communiqué makes strong statements in support of other key priorities of the United States. The communiqué notes the continued threat posed by international terrorism, and supports actions to counter money laundering and the financing of terrorism. We should not overlook the fact that a key uncertainty is the threat of terrorism. The ministers recognized that international remittances are an increasingly important part of international financial flows, and we pledged to continue our work to reduce obstacles to these flows.

Thank you. I have time to take a few questions.
