---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education, Dan Iannicola, Jr. Delivers Remarks at Georgetown University on Integrating Financial Education in K-12 Curriculum to Visiting Business Teachers Enrolled In University of Delaware Graduate Program
date: 2004-07-15
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1793
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1793

 

Deputy Assistant Secretary forFinancial Education, Dan Iannicola, Jr. today addressed over 25 visiting teachers, from across the country and abroad, at GeorgetownUniversity in Washington, D.C.  The teachers are participants in a University of Delaware, Lerner College of Business and Economics graduate program.  Through the University of Delaware's Center for Economic Education and Entrepreneurship, they work toward earning a Master of Arts degree in Economics and Entrepreneurship for Educators.  In his remarks Mr. Iannicola stressed the importance of integrating financial education in the classroom, and the practical, life-long benefits of improving students' level of financial literacy.

Mr. Iannicola also advised the teachers on how to pick the best financialeducation program for their classrooms and how to present financial education topics for maximum impact on student learning and retention.  So many of your students will graduate high school and find themselves quickly facing important finacial decisions.  Shouldn't those students' skills be at least as developed as the financial services marketplace they will enter?  Through your training in this program and your critical work in the classroom you can equip your students with the financial knowledge they need.  Thank you for making a daily difference in the lives ofAmerica's kids.

The purpose of the graduate program is to strengthen the economic and entrepreneurial content of instruction at the primary and secondary school level.  The program explores methods of providing greater opportunity for interdisciplinary work in math, science and social sciences.  It is also focuses on establishing a network of educators who can help instruct teachers in effective methods of teaching economics and entrepreneurship.  The program is open to educators who meet theUniversityofDelaware's graduate admission requirements, and have completed a minimum of three semester hours of economics.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office ofFinancial Education(Office) in May 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office ofFinancial Educationvisit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).
