---
title: 'Treasury Official Leads Phoenix Round Table, Financial Education: Strengthening Hispanic Families'
date: 2004-09-14T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1917
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

js-1917

 

Sandra Pedroarias, Director of Outreach for Treasury's Office of Financial Education today led a roundtable entitled Financial Education: Strengthening Hispanic Families. The roundtable was hosted by Friendly House in Phoenix, Arizona. The roundtable discussion focused on Treasury's efforts to improve financial literacy across the country, as well as community-based organizations' efforts in Arizona to strengthen Hispanic families through financial education.

Pedroarias discussed federal financial education resources available to local organizations that are providing assistance to the Hispanic community, and also discussed how community-based organizations can improve the effectiveness of their programs to better serve Hispanic families.

Federal financial education resources are plentiful in English as well as in Spanish, and Treasury is committed to making important information on topics related to personal finance easily accessible to everyone in the United States. Community-based organizations like those represented here today continue to demonstrate their commitment to help strengthen Hispanic families in historically underserved communities, said Pedroarias. By helping to deliver important information about how to make wiser personal finance decisions, these organizations are not only empowering the individuals they serve, but they are also assisting Hispanic families in their communities.

Founded in 1920, Friendly House, a community-based organization, provides comprehensive literacy services to adults in order to improve their standards of living and expand their contribution to the community. Friendly House offers various services including financial literacy instruction to adults learning about savings, use of checking and the wise use of credit.

Other organizations participating in today's financial education roundtable include: Arizona Department of Education, Goodwill Industries, Arizona Call-a-Teen Youth Resources, Inc., Chicanos Por La Causa, Arizona OIC, Rio Salado Community College, Valle del Sol, Inc., City of Avondale, Stardust Foundation, Golden Gate Community Center, Phoenix Indian Center, Arizona Education and Employment, Inc., Maricopa County Adult Probation, Queen Creek USD, and Arizona Saves.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education. Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, homeownership, and retirement planning. The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States. For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://home.treasury.gov/about/organizational-structure/offices/Pages/--Office-of-Financial-Education-and-Financial-Access.aspx).

- 30 -
