---
title: 'The Honorable John W. Snow Prepared Remarks: Independence Chamber of Commerce Independence, MO'
date: 2004-10-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1996
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

JS-1996

Good morning; it's great to be here in Independence. I appreciate the opportunity to talk with you about the economy both here in Missouri, and all across this great nation of ours.

Here in Missouri, you've added thousands of jobs to your payrolls so far this year. That's good news for a lot of Missouri familiesbut I know it could be even better.

There are still people here in the Show Me State who are saying: Show me where my new job will come from!

And we can't be satisfied until those folks have found jobs.

I am often asked where the jobs of the future will come from a month from now, a decade from now. That's a pretty tough question to answer. No one can predict what the next great technology or industry will be, but I know it's safe to say that most of America's jobs will always come from people like the ones gathered in this room today.

Your businesses may be small. They may never show up on the New York Stock Exchange or the Fortune 500 listbut they create jobs for the people of your community, and that means everything.

When our country goes through a rough patch, economically, small business has always been there to pull us out. You are part of the most powerful elements of our economy, which I see as a combination of: small-business owners and entrepreneurs, our outstanding workforce and the simple fact that we operate as a free market. These elements add up to the most open, flexible, adaptive and resilient economy in the world today.

The President understands how important you are to our economy, and he's made you a priority in his economic policies.

He understands that, as small-business owners and operators, fairness and freedom are the only two things that you really want from your government.

You seek the freedom to start up a new business venture, to run it and grow it, or to close the door and go fishing if that's what you want to do. You also want to be treated fairly, and you deserve nothing less.

In exchange for fairness and freedom, your unspoken promise to your country and our economy is: job creation and the fuel our economic engine runs on.

This is why the President cut your taxes and has called on Capitol Hill to give you the option of Association Health Plans to reduce your health insurance costs. That's why he wants to make the tax code simpler, fairer, and pro-growth. And it's why he wants to reduce that fear of baseless lawsuits that haunts you, costs you money, and ultimately acts as a tax on economic growth in this country.

With small business in the lead, our economy has come a long way.

When he took office, President Bush inherited an economy in steep decline. The stock market bubble had been pierced. We were then shocked by terrorist attacks and wounded by reprehensible behavior by corporate CEOs that hurt employees, investors and investor confidence.

Those key elements that I mentioned earlier small business, outstanding workers, and a free-market system proved to be the foundation, as they always have been, for our impressive economic recovery following this series of economic blows.

Sound monetary policy from the Federal Reserve Board helped to stimulate our recovery as well. Lower interest rates encouraged investment, which is critical for economic recovery and growth.

Finally, President Bush's tax cuts gave our economy the oxygen it needed to right itself, and continue on a path of growth and job creation.

Letting people keep more of their own money, and spend it how they see fit, has helped put our nation on the right track. Nationwide, 1.7 million jobs have been created over the past year 12 straight months of job growth. More people than ever before own their own homes. People are finding new jobs or getting a raise at work. They have more money in their pockets and can better afford things from cars to appliances to shoes for their children. That said, we are not satisfied.

The President's tax relief is still working for the people of Missouri, with more than 2 million taxpayers saving money on their income tax bills in 2004 and 440,000 business taxpayers like you able to use your 2004 tax savings to invest in business equipment and employee compensation.

At this point, it is critical to make that tax relief permanent, and to continue lifting the barriers to growth in other areas as well by making health care more affordable, abusive lawsuits more scarce, and energy costs more reasonable.

Thank you so much for having me here today in this great American city, and thank you for the work you do to keep our economy strong.
