---
title: Secretary Snow Names Daniel Glaser Deputy Assistant Secretary of Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes
date: 2004-11-05
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2086
---
*(Archived Content)*



js-2086



U.S. Treasury Secretary John W. Snow announced today that Daniel Glaser has been named Deputy Assistant Secretary for the Office of Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes (TF/FC).



Danny has been a critical player in establishing important anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing policies over the past several years.He has well-represented the United States Government in helping safeguard the financial sector both at home and abroad, said Treasury Secretary John Snow.The extensive knowledge and expertise he brings to his new position will further enhance initiatives to protect the financial system from corruption.



Mr. Glaser functions as the primary Treasury official for the development and coordination of international anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing policy.He is a key official in developing and implementing strategies to disrupt and dismantle money laundering and terrorist financing networks worldwide, and has led the Treasury effort to identify and secure theU.S.financial system from foreign money laundering and terrorist financing threats.



Mr. Glaser already plays a leading role in the international fight against money laundering and terrorist financing.He serves as the head of theU.S.delegation to the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) the premier international body in the fight against money laundering.In that role, he is Co-Chairman of the FATF Working Group on Terrorist Financing, which is responsible for setting international standards in the area of counter-terrorist financing.



Mr. Glaser also has extensive experience addressing terrorist financing issues with an array of other international bodies including the G-7, theInternationalMonetary Fund, and World Bank, and has served as the lead Treasury negotiator of the money laundering provisions in the U.N. Transnational Organized Crime Convention.Mr. Glaser has additionally represented the Treasury Department on numerous important bilateral terrorist financing related missions toEuropeand theMiddle East.



TF/FC resides within the Treasury's Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (TFI), which was created by the Department earlier this year to bolster efforts in the financial war on terror.Mr. Glaser was named to this position as a part of the new, elevated leadership at the Treasury committed to combating terrorist financing, protecting the integrity of the financial system, fighting financial crime, enforcing economic sanctions against rogue nations and assisting in the ongoing hunt for Iraqi assets.



Mr. Glaser previously served as the first Director of the Treasury Department's Executive Office of Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes, which was established in March 2003, and prior to that as Director of the Money Laundering and Financial Crimes Section of the Treasury.Mr. Glaser has also served as Senior Counsel for Financial Crimes in the Treasury Department's Office of the General Counsel, and prior to that as an attorney in the U.S. Secret Service Office of the Chief Counsel.



Mr. Glaser is a graduate of theUniversityofMichiganand Columbia University School of Law, and began his career as an associate in the law firm of Coudert Brothers.



- 30 -
