---
title: 'MEDIA ADVISORY: Secretary Snow to Visit St. Louis, Missouri Tomorrow to Discuss U.S. Economy'
date: 2004-10-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2015
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary John W. Snow will visit the St. Louis, Missouri area on Wednesday, October 13 to meet with local business leaders and students to discuss the President's efforts to strengthen the economy and create jobs.



As a result of the President's economic leadership, we have overcome a recession and seen 13 straight months of job creation, totaling more than 1.9 million new U.S. jobs since August 2003, said Secretary Snow.  Missouri has gained new jobs this year, and the President's tax reform policies have ensured that more than 2 million Missouri taxpayers will have lower income tax bills in 2004.



During this trip to Missouri, Secretary Snow also will discuss the Administration's efforts to control health care costs, reduce frivolous lawsuits and ensure that America has reliable and affordable sources of energy.  While the economy is on solid footing, we are not satisfied and there is still more work to be done.  We need to continue to push for pro-growth policies that will create jobs and raise standards of living, Secretary Snow said.



Recent indicators show that President Bush's economic policies continue to move the economy forward.  According to the Labor Department, the national unemployment rate was 5.4% in September – down 0.9 percentage point from a peak of 6.3% in June 2003 and the lowest rate since October 2001.  At 5.4%, the unemployment rate is below the average of the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s.  Employment over the last year was up in 47 of the 50 states and the unemployment rate was down in all regions and in 45 of the 50 states.



The following event is open to the media, which must present media credentials or photo ID:



**Wednesday, October 13**



Tour and Roundtable with Local Business Leaders at Keller LaboratoriesKeller Laboratories160 Larkin Williams Industrial CourtFenton, MO**10:30 am CDT** Media should arrive by 10:00 am** There will be a brief media availability immediately following the event**
