---
title: Remarks By Secretary Snow at Swearing-In Ceremony of Under Secretary Levey
date: 2004-09-13
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1912
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS



js-1912

  

*Undersecretary for Enforcement, Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence*



I am delighted to be able to participate in today's very special swearing-in ceremony. This is an historic day for the Treasury Department as well as for the Levey family.



We are so pleased to welcome Stuart to the Treasury Department to take up the critically important role as Under Secretary of the Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence. As Treasury's Under Secretary for Enforcement Stuart will lead efforts that are a vital part of the larger global war against terrorism.



Stuart will be the first-ever Under Secretary for the Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence, and he is more than up for this substantial task. This department, and this country, are fortunate to benefit from his service.



The oath of office that Stuart will take today has been taken by thousands of public servants before him… but it gained new meaning after the attacks of September 11th.



On Saturday's anniversary of those horrific events, I represented the President and First Lady at the memorial in New York City. It was an extremely moving experience as I looked into the eyes of the victims' families. In their eyes, I saw such sorrow… but also such resolve.



After that experience, after marking that terrible anniversary, I am struck by the significance of today's ceremony.



Today, Stuart will swear to protect our country, our constitution, against all enemies – foreign and domestic. Indeed, that is specifically why his role, and the Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence was created.



On this third anniversary of 9-11 we must always keep in mind the fundamental fact that while the terrorists are motivated by hatred, money makes their evil actions possible. They need money to recruit, train, plan and maintain their operations. Following the money and interdicting the flows is a means to the larger end of stopping terrorists and their killing.



The financial war on terrorism is designed to cripple terrorist organizations – to make it much more difficult to raise, store and move money.



The work that Stuart oversees plays a vital role in the overall, interagency campaign against terrorism. This is an extraordinary effort involving many extraordinary people, relying upon cooperation across the U.S. Government.



Stuart brings all the requisite background experience, skills and talents to this effort. Through his important work at the Justice Department on the interagency task forces, he has developed a keen appreciation of the issues and what it takes to prevail. He knows that this is a cooperative venture and he knows the players from the other agencies. He appreciates that law enforcement is at the front line in the war on terrorism, and that successful prosecution remains a potent weapon on the domestic front. He also brings the respect and admiration of colleagues around the government, including, importantly, Attorney General Ashcroft, Deputy Attorney General Comey and FBI Director Mueller.



We are honored that the Attorney General is with us today as well as the Deputy Attorney General. We thank them for all their superb efforts in the war on terror and on a personal note I want to thank them for supporting Stuart's coming to Treasury. Losing someone of Stuart's talent and ability is never easy and you have been terrific in supporting Stuart's move here.



I cannot over-emphasize the importance of the efforts of this new Treasury office… or my confidence in Stuart Levey. Stuart, welcome to Treasury, and thank you for your dedication to serving and protecting your country.



-30-
