---
title: Treasury Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Launches Financial Education Technical Assistance Center at Credit Industry Conference in Las Vegas
date: 2004-09-28T00:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1999
---
*(Archived Content)*

js-1999

Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education, Dan Iannicola, Jr., today introduced a new service offered by Treasury's Office of Financial Education.  The Office's new Technical Assistance Center will advise groups or individuals wishing to start or enhance financial education programs in their communities.  Iannicola made the announcement before senior credit executives from more than 30 organizations at the fall conference of the Credit Industry Research Council.

During his remarks, Iannicola described the Technical Assistance Center as a place where those with an interest in financial education can receive input on program design and available resources, explore partnerships with other organizations and learn about best practices in financial education.  Iannicola also commended those members of the credit industry that have devoted resources to financial education.

"The credit industry is uniquely positioned to provide meaningful education to millions of Americans, and we can help," said Iannicola.  "With today's launch of the Technical Assistance Center, Treasury recommits itself to improving financial education in America, and one the best ways to do that is by offering our support and advice to those trying to bring financial education to their communities.  By helping financial education programs get started or get better, the center fills an important need in the financial education community."

Iannicola explained that the center can be accessed online at[http://www.treasury.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education)or by telephone at (202) 622-9372.  He said the two goals of the center were to increase the reach and impact of financial education programs nationwide and to lever federal financial education resources in the most efficient way possible. "When we support the expansion of financial education, we increase levels of ownership, of financial security and of consumer protection, and we go a long way toward helping people help themselves" said Iannicola.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).

-30-
