---
title: 'Media Advisory: Assistant Secretary Wayne Abernathy to Lead Identity Theft Workshop, “Fighting Identity Theft: Outsmarting the Crooks” in Kansas City, Missouri'
date: 2004-05-21T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1676
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions Wayne A. Abernathy will lead a workshop, Fighting Identity Theft: Outsmarting the Crooks, on May 26 at Penn Valley Community College in Kansas City, MO. Catherine A. Allen, CEO of BITS, a non-profit consortium of 100 of the nation’s largest financial institutions, will co-host the event.

Identity thieves strike an estimated 10 million Americans a year, costing them $5 billion and countless hours to restore their good names. Recently, so-called phishing attacks have skyrocketed, as identity thieves try to trick consumers into submitting personal information to spoofed Web sites.

Experts from the front lines of the battle, including financial institution, law enforcement, and innovative technology firm representatives, will provide consumers the needed information to protect themselves and fight identity theft.

Assistant Secretary Abernathy will highlight the tools available to consumers through the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions (FACT) Act. Abernathy also will moderate a panel discussion about the ways in which financial institutions are helping consumers fight identity theft. A second panel moderated by Camden Fine, President and CEO of the Independent Community Bankers of America, will detail how law enforcement tracks and prosecutes an identity theft case. Allen will outline several important initiatives of the financial services industry and will host the third panel, which will highlight some innovative technologies that help safeguard and detect identity theft.

**WHO**: Assistant Secretary Wayne A. Abernathy, the Department of the TreasuryCatherine A. Allen, CEO, BITSCamden Fine, President and CEO, Independent Community Bankers of AmericaDistinguished guests from the front lines of the fight against identity theft** WHAT:** A workshop on new tools for consumers to use in the fight against identity theft, with expert advice from leaders of financial institutions, law enforcement, and technology companies.** WHEN:** Wednesday, May 26, 20049:30 a.m. – 12:15 p.m. CDT** WHERE:** Penn Valley Community College3201 SW TrafficwayKansas City, MO 64111** CONTACTS: Media planning to cover the event should contact Treasury’s Office of Public Affairs at 202/622-2960.   Individuals interested in attending the workshop should contact Keviar Warner at**[** keviar@fsround.org**](mailto:keviar@fsround.org)** or 202-589-2435.**
