---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education, Dan Iannicola, Jr. and the Missouri Society of Certified Public Accountants Team Up to Teach a Financial Education Class at Gotsch Elementary, Affton School District in St. Louis, Missouri
date: 2004-05-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1547
---
*(Archived Content)*

Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. today joined the Missouri Society of Certified Public Accountants to team-teach a financial education class at Gotsch Elementary, AfftonSchool District in St. Louis, Missouri.  While in St. Louis, Iannicola also presented a Certificate of Recognition to the International Institute of St. Louis for providing financial education to refugees and new immigrants.



It is great to be back in Affton schools again, said Iannicola who served as president of the Affton Board of Education from 1999-2001. It is even better when I can bring with me a great volunteer like Jerry Nichols who is representing the Missouri Society of Certified Public Accountants. Today we helped teach Affton 4th graders some of the basics of personal financial management, Iannicola went on to say.



The Missouri Society of Certified Public Accountants (MSCPA), a statewide association comprised of more than 8,500 CPAs, is dedicated to advancing CPAs and their profession through professional development, government advocacy and student-education initiatives. MSCPA offers a variety of in-school programs that teach students about accounting and the accounting profession all across Missouri. MSCPA also works with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), including on national efforts to raise awareness about the crucial role certified public accountants play in financial education.



Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola also today presented a Certificate of Recognition to the International Institute of St. Louis for providing financial education to refugees and new immigrants. Through participation in the Individual Account (IDA) program, refugees have an opportunity to save money toward purchase of a first home, an automobile, a post-secondary education, or to open a small business. The International Institute’s Personal Finance Workshops about Banking, Consumer Credit, Budgeting and Consumer Skills are held monthly and are given by staff and volunteers.



The International Institute offers a great opportunity for those new to this country to learn essential skills related to banking, credit management and financing large purchases, Iannicola added. It helps them avoid the pitfalls and realize the benefits of a sophisticated financial services marketplace.



The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May 2002. The office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on, saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.  The office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies, and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:www.treas.gov/financialeducation.



-30-
