---
title: John B. Taylor Under Secretary for International Affairs United States Treasury Asian Development Bank Annual Meeting Jeju Island, Korea May 16, 2004
date: 2004-05-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1560
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1560

 

It is an honor for me to be here in Jeju Island for the 37th Annual Meeting of the Asian Development Bank, and I extend my deepest thanks to our Korean hosts for their gracious arrangements in this beautiful place. I would also like to welcome ADB’s newest members, Luxembourg and Palau, to the meeting. I would like to congratulate donors and ADB management on a successful conclusion to the ADF-9 replenishment.

**Economic Development Agenda of the United States**Since the beginning of President Bush’s time in office, he has stressed four core principles in U.S. development policy. Financial assistance for the poorest countries should be increased. More assistance should be provided in the form of grants. Development assistance should be subject to rigorous measurable results. And support should be targeted to countries that pursue pro-growth policies.**Implementation at the ADB**At the international financial institutions, including the ADB, we have worked together with many other countries to implement these principles. And we are very pleased that this cooperative effort has been a success at the ADB. Over the past several years, the Bank has demonstrated a willingness and ability to change that is impressive. We are cautiously optimistic that these changes will be sustained. Let me be specific.**Increasing Financial Assistance for the Region’s Poorest Countries**The United States increased its contribution to ADF-9 by 12 percent from the previous replenishment, in line with commitments we made to IDA-13 and AfDF-9. We will consider the possibility of additional support to the ADB contingent upon the achievement of critical benchmarks for reform. Our expanded support for the Asian Bank is congruent with this administration’s dramatic increase in support for HIV/AIDS and expansion in bilateral U.S. assistance to the best performing poorest countries through the Millennium Challenge Account.**Increased Grant Assistance**We particularly applaud the decision of donors, with strong support from Bank management, to devote 21 percent of ADF assistance for grants in the region’s poorest and most-vulnerable countries starting in 2005. The money will fund schools, health care, sanitation, and other basic human needs where demand is greatest and resources are most scarce. Afghanistan, Laos, Cambodia, Kyrgyz Republic and Nepal will receive up to 50 percent of their assistance in the form of grants. Other vulnerable countries will also receive substantial grant allocations. The poorest countries will be eligible for 100% grants for technical assistance and prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS. We would like to see the flexibility and country-focus of this model adopted by other financial institutions and look forward to reviewing the ADB’s progress as the first grants projects are rolled out in January.**Rigorous Measurable Results**Results measurement is no longer a slogan but a growing and essential part of the way the ADB does business. By the end of the year, the Bank has committed to put in place a new human resources policy that remunerates staff for development outputs, not lending targets. The Bank has established a dedicated office to guide implementation of results measurement at the country, sector, and project level. These results indicators will measure quantifiable outputs in infrastructure, agriculture, health and education. We look forward to reviewing the first results-based Country Strategy and Programs by the end of the year.

We would now like to see the Bank’s commitments translated into more concrete actions. Results are a part of some Bank-funded projects but not all. In Afghanistan, the Bank put in place a time-bound framework for the completion of a critical Kandahar to Spin Boldak road linking Afghanistan and Pakistan to economies in Central Asia. In Cambodia, the Bank provided a critical health sector project that has improved the availability and quality of health services of more than 5 million people, including 2 million of the country’s most poor, and improved pre-natal care for 2.5 million women. We would like to see this type of results measurement adopted at all levels of the ADB and in all projects and programs, public or private sector. To be effective, results management must become an integral part of the culture of the institution and be communicated by ADB top-level management to those inside and outside the institution.

**Encouraging Pro-Growth Policies**The ADB should support countries that pursue good policies. It has already taken steps to strengthen its performance-based allocation system by increasing the focus on good governance and strong economic growth. These indicators should be comparable to those used by other institutions, place a premium on performance, and be transparent. In support of these objectives, we believe the ADB should place greater emphasis on providing resources directed to high-impact, productivity-enhancing activities.

There is a growing consensus that a robust private sector is critical to growth and poverty reduction. Support for small enterprises is particularly important. No country has achieved sustainable growth without a robust small business sector and no country can hope to foster innovation and generate jobs without small business growth. As an example, the Bank is providing support to small- and medium-sized enterprises in Pakistan. Nearly 30,000 small businesses will benefit from access to financial services and 8,000 from the operations of the private sector-managed Business Support Fund, which will enhance the productivity and competitiveness of these businesses. We would like to see this type of assistance substantially increased across the region. In order to do so, the Bank must marshal resources internally and continue to pursue innovative mechanisms to support private sector growth including through equity investments, guarantees, and local currency financing.

Remittance flows can also benefit from novel financing services. Nearly $30 billion in remittances flowed to Asia in 2002, representing a significant flow of income to poor families. The ADB has an important role to play in catalyzing remittance flows and increasing their cost effectiveness. A pilot remittance program has already been rolled out in the Philippines and will be discussed with APEC economies in Tokyo in June. We hope the Bank will continue to resource these important initiatives and apply lessons learned to other countries in the region.

**Conclusion**The ADB has made substantial progress to become a more results-oriented and transparent institution. The key now is to implement these impressive reform policies quickly and to make this an irreversible part of the Bank’s institutional culture. Private sector lending should become an increasing part of ADB operations. We will monitor progress on this reform agenda with great interest and consider the possibility of additional support to the ADB based on the achievement of critical benchmarks for reform. We hope to strengthen our partnership for reform with the ADB to address the evolving needs of the region.
