---
title: U.S. Designates Bin Laden’s Mouthpiece
date: 2004-01-16T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js1102
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

WASHINGTON-- The U.S. Treasury Department today announced the designation of the man who stood beside Usama bin Laden when he declared responsibility for the attacks of September 11th.Today’s action comes in response to the designation of this individual as a terrorist by the United Nations.

      

**Sulaiman Jassem Sulaiman Abo G haith (Abo Ghaith)** became the spokesperson for al-Qaeda after the attacks ofSeptember 11th, 2001.  He repeatedly appeared in broadcasts on behalf of al-Qaeda, claiming responsibility for that attack and others, including the November 2002 suicide attacks inKenyathat killed 13 people.  Although he was born inKuwait, the Kuwaiti government revoked his citizenship in 2001.

      

Today’s action is taken under obligations to freeze the assets of individuals and organizations listed by the UN.   The name was originally submitted to the UN by another country for listing.  A UN listing requires all Member States to freeze the assets of those listed and to bar cross-border travel.   The UN listed this individual on Friday, January 16th.

      

With today’s action, theU.S.and our international partners have designated 346 individuals and organizations as terrorists and terrorist supporters and have frozen over $139.1 million in terrorist assets.

      

More information regarding Abo Ghaith is attached.

 

-30-

 

**Related Documents:**

- [Sulaiman Jassem Sulaiman Abo Ghaith (Abo Ghaith)](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/1102_abo_ghaith.pdf)
