---
title: Statement by Secretary Snow on Charitable Giving During Ramadan
date: 2004-10-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2041
---
*(Archived Content)*



js-2041

*Treasury Secretary John W. Snow made the following remarks regarding the sanctity of charitable giving during Ramadan:*  

Assalamualaikum and Ramadan greetings to our Muslim American brethren in the United States and Muslim friends around the world.

  

Ramadan, a month of giving and benevolence, is a very special time for Muslims, marked by worship, contemplation, prayers and fasting. American Muslims practicing the Five Pillars of the Islamic faith, Shahada (affirmation), Salat (prayer), Zakat (almsgiving), Sawm (Fasting) and Hajj (pilgrimage), enrich our lives by strengthening the bonds of family, community and country.

  

Indeed, charity is a fundamental element of American and Islamic culture. Americans give billions of dollars each year to help their neighbors in the United States and around the world. Through Zakat, Muslims have helped countless people around the globe with their charity and kindness.

  

Sadly, some have preyed on the charitable spirit of Americans and our friends worldwide by using charities as a conduit to finance terrorist activity. Those who have corrupted the goodwill of donors do not represent the mainstream values of people of good faith, including Muslims. As President Bush has said, the face of terror is not the true faith of Islam, which is a religion of peace.

  

The Treasury Department is working to stop the flow of terrorist funds that infiltrate the charitable sector by identifying and designating charities that finance al Qaida, Hamas and other terrorist organizations. In addition, we continue to work closely with the Arab and Muslim communities, as well as the charitable sector at large, to develop voluntary guidelines and practices to help protect the integrity of the charitable sector and ensure confidence in the donor community.

  

When you open your hearts to charity during Ramadan, we encourage you to educate yourself on the activities of the charities to which you donate, to help ensure that your generosity is not exploited for nefarious purposes.

  

The kindness of Muslim Americans, and the generosity of people of all faiths, truly makes our world a better place. Happy Ramadan, Ramadan Mubarak, said Snow.

  *U.S. Department of the Treasury Anti-Terrorist Financing Guidelines: Voluntary Best Practices for U.S.-Based Charities: http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/docs/tocc.pdf**The following charitable organizations have been designated by the United States Government for supporting terrorism: Makhtab al-Khidamat/Al Kifah (formerly U.S.-based) Al Rashid Trust (Pakistan) WAFA Humanitarian Organization (Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and UAE)  Rabita Trust (Pakistan)  The Holy Land Foundation for Relief and Development (U.S.)  Ummah Tamer E-Nau (Pakistan)  Revival of Islamic Heritage Society (Afghanistan and Pakistan)  Afghan Support Committee (Pakistan)  Aid Organization of the Ulema (Pakistan)  Global Relief Foundation (U.S.)  Benevolence International Foundation (U.S.)  enevolence International Fund (Canada)  Bosanska Idealna Futura (Bosnia)  Lajnat al Daawa al Islamiyya (Kuwait)  Stichting Benevolence International Nederland (Netherlands)  Al Aqsa Foundation (U.S., Europe, Pakistan, Yemen, South Africa)  Commitde Bienfaisance et de Secours aux Palestiniens (France)  Association de Secours Palestinien (Switzerland)  Interpal (UK)  Palestinian Association in Austria (Austria)  Sanibil Association for Relief and Development (Lebanon)  Al Akhtar Trust (Pakistan)  Al Haramain Foundation (Afghanistan, Albania, Bangladesh, Bosnia, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Kenya, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Somalia, and Tanzania) Islamic African Relief Agency (Global network) Taibah International (Bosnia)  Al-Haramain & Al Masjed Al Aqsa Charity Foundation (Bosnia) Al Furqan (Bosnia) *Makhtab al-Khidamat/Al Kifah (formerly U.S.-based) 

-30-
