---
title: Treasury Secretary Snow Appoints David Loevinger as Financial Attach in China
date: 2005-10-03
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2961
---
*(Archived Content)*



JS-2961



Treasury Secretary John W. Snow today announced that he is appointing David Loevinger as the Department's Financial Attachin China. Loevinger will be responsible for direct engagement with China on a broad array on economic issues including banking, capital markets, financial regulation, monetary policy, and exchange rate policy.



David's deployment comes at a critical juncture in the United State's economic dialogue with China, said Secretary Snow. I'm pleased we will have him on the ground to lead our extensive communications with Chinese economic authorities at all levels and maintain the close and continual communications on the many economic issues that face both of our countries and the global economy.



Loevinger is currently the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Africa, the Middle East and Asia reporting to the Assistant and Under Secretary for International Affairs. Loevinger advises senior Treasury officials on activities of the International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and regional development banks in these regions. He has led efforts to encourage Asian economies to adopt flexible exchange rates in fora such as the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and in improving the effectiveness of U.S. financial assistance provided to Turkey, Israel, Egypt, and Pakistan. His earlier positions at Treasury (he first joined in 1991 as a staff economist) included Director of the Office of East Asian Nations, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary, Economist on the Mexico Crisis Task Force, and Assistant Attachin Paris.



In 1995-1999, Loevinger worked at the IMF, first in the U.S. Executive Director's office and then as an economist in the Caribbean Division.



Loevinger received a B.A. from Dartmouth College in 1984. In 1988, he completed a Master's in Public Policy from the Kennedy School and then spent three years working for the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, the Senate Banking Committee, and the U.S. Commerce Department.
