---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Addresses State Legislators on Financial Literacy
date: 2005-04-15T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2394
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2394

Treasury's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education, Dan Iannicola, spoke today to state legislators and staff at the National Conference of State Legislators Spring Forum in Washington, D.C. about the Treasury's and the Financial Literacy and Education Commission's initiatives to improve financial education across the country. During a panel discussion entitled Money + Knowledge = Financial Literacy, Iannicola asked the participants' to encourage Financial education in their states.

Improving the financial literacy of the people in your states is not easy, but we can help, said Iannicola. He told the legislators about the broad array of financial education resources available from the federal government through the MyMoney Web site and hotline ([www.mymoney.gov](http://www.mymoney.gov)and 1-888-mymoney), in both English and Spanish. MyMoney puts the best the federal government has to offer in one place. It's all here and it's all free.

The National Conference of State Legislators (NCSL) is a bipartisan organization serving the legislators and staffs of the nation's 50 states, its commonwealths and territories. The NCSL provides research, technical assistance and opportunities for policymakers to exchange ideas on the most pressing state issues. Today's panel discussion on financial literacy constitutes part of a broader NCSL financial education effort.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).

   
