---
title: Tony Fratto Sworn in as Treasury Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs
date: 2005-12-22
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js3063
---
*(Archived Content)*

 Treasury Deputy Secretary Robert M. Kimmitt today swore in Tony Fratto as Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs.  Nominated for the position by President George W. Bush on October 7, 2005, Fratto was confirmed by the United States Senate on December 17, 2005.

As Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs, Fratto is the lead representative of the Treasury Department and Secretary John W. Snow for media, business, professional trade organizations, consumer groups, and the public.  In addition to serving as the chief spokesman, Fratto will also design and implement policies and communications strategies for the Department that will increase the public's knowledge and understanding of Treasury's activities and services.  In his new role, Fratto also will oversee the Office of Public Liaison.

Fratto has served at the Treasury Department since March 2001, first as a public affairs specialist, then as the Director of the Office of Public Affairs, and most recently as the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs. In these positions, he held primary responsibility for the Department's communications regarding international finance and development issues, as well as daily oversight of the office's personnel and budget.

Before joining the Treasury Department, Fratto worked as a communications specialist for the Bush-Cheney 2000 campaign in Pennsylvania.  Prior to joining the Bush-Cheney campaign, Fratto served as Vice President of Government Affairs for the Pittsburgh Regional Alliance.  Earlier in his career Fratto was the Director of Community and Economic Affairs (Pittsburgh) for Pennsylvania Governor Tom Ridge and Communications Director for U.S. Senator Rick Santorum (R-PA).

Originally from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Fratto is a graduate of the University of Pittsburgh, earning a BA in Economics.  He also attended the University's Graduate School of Public and International Affairs with a concentration on international political economy.
