---
title: Statement of Treasury Secretary John W. Snow On the Departure of Treasury Assistant Secretary John Duncan
date: 2005-03-28T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2339
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2339

Today the Treasury Department says farewell and offers best wishes to one of the most dedicated, skilled public servants I've had the honor to work with. John Duncan, Treasury's Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs, is leaving our team after four years of exemplary service.

Since joining the Bush Administration in 2001, Treasury's legislative calendar has been full, and John Duncan was involved in numerous legislative successes, each and every year of his tenure.

In 2001, he helped pass the President's landmark tax cuts and ensured that the Patriot Act would expand Treasury's authorities to freeze terrorist assets.

In 2002, John was part of a team to successfully structure and pass Department of Homeland Security transfer legislation. He also shepherded the Terrorism Risk Insurance bill, which provided a stable and guaranteed insurance market for United States industries laboring under the threat of terrorist attack.

In 2003, John was once again part of a successful effort to reduce taxes. Since the enactment of that bill, the American economy has expanded and grown at a terrific, steady rate, creating over three million new jobs since May of 2003. In 2004, John helped persuade Congress to extend those beneficial tax cuts.

The year 2003 also saw the creation of Treasury's Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (TFI) a new weapon against terror as well as the passage and signing of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACT Act).

Beyond the specific legislative victories and there were plenty of them we will all look back on John's contributions as, more broadly, four-plus years of sound, mature advice for Treasury officials on everything from testifying before Congress, to negotiating with Members and staff, to silently securing four years of domestic and international appropriations to pay Treasury's bills and salaries.

All this was done without fanfare, and with tremendous grace. His counsel was sought and valued on matters far beyond the Congress because he always offered an intelligent, fair perspective as well as fresh ideas that never failed to renew our passion for the policy battle of the day.

On behalf of the Treasury team, we wish John very well in his future endeavors; we know how fortunate we were to work by his side, and he will be deeply missed.

 

**REPORTS**

- [J. Duncans Letter of Resignation](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/duncanletter32805.pdf)
