---
title: Henry Sworn In As Assistant Secretary For Financial Institutions
date: 2005-10-19T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2980
---
*(Archived Content)*

js-2980

The Treasury Department today announced that Emil W. Henry, Jr. was sworn in as Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Financial Institutions onOctober 13, 2005.As Assistant Secretary, Mr. Henry serves as an advisor to the Secretary of Treasury, Deputy Secretary and Undersecretary of Domestic Finance on matters regarding financial institutions legislation and regulation, legislation affecting federal agencies that regulate or insure financial institutions, securities markets legislation and regulation, and the promotion of consumer access and protection in financial services.Mr. Henry also oversees the Office of Critical Infrastructure Protection and Compliance, Office of Financial Education, the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund and the Office of Sallie Mae Oversight.Mr. Henry brings more than20 years experience on Wall Street and in the financial communityto the position. Before joining the Treasury, he most recently served asa senior partner ofGleacher Partners, a worldwide investment banking and investment management firm where he was Managing Director, Chairman of Asset Management, and Chairman of Gleacher Fund Advisors.During his tenure with Gleacher, he hadoversight responsibility for the firm's core investment activities which include private equity and mezzanine debt investing and several pooled investment vehicles in the form of hedge funds.  Mr. Henry has extensive experience in management buyouts, mergers and acquisitions, equity and debt financing, and a wide array of sophisticated investment vehicles.  Prior to his position at Gleacher Partners, Mr. Henry was a member of Morgan Stanley's merchant banking arm responsible for the firm's principal investments.Mr. Henry graduated*cum laude*in Economics fromYale University in 1983 and received his MBA from Harvard Business School in 1987.  Mr. Henry is married with three children and maintains residence in Washington, D.C. and Katonah, NY.

 

**###**
