---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Speaks to Educators at Teacher Training Institute in Madison, Wisconsin
date: 2005-08-05T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2680
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2680

Treasury's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola Jr. today addressed high school teachers and education leaders at the 2005 National Institute of Financial and Economic Literacy hosted at Edgewood College in Madison, Wisconsin. Iannicola commended the educators for their interest in bringing financial education to their classrooms.

Iannicola discussed the unique position of teachers to help students make the most of their financial future by providing personal financial lessons in their classrooms. He also applauded the 2005 National Institute of Financial and Economic Literacy for continuing to provide teachers with the ability and skills they need to improve the financial literacy of their students.

Teachers understand better than most the power of knowledge to change lives, Iannicola said. The teachers I've met with today understand that financial knowledge is an essential life skill for young people to master. By bringing financial education into their classrooms, these educators are empowering their students to make the most of their money and their lives.

The 2005 National Institute of Financial and Economic Literacy, formerly known as the Wisconsin Institute of Financial and Economic Education, is a program offered to educators that teach personal finance or seek the ability to teach personal finance in their classrooms. Educators may earn three graduate credits by attending the 2005 National Institute of Financial and Economic Literacy. The 2005 National Institute of Financial and Economic Literacy is presented by the Wisconsin Jump$tart Coalition and sponsored by the CBM Credit Education Foundation, a nonprofit corporation focused on increasing financial literacy.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://home.treasury.gov/about/organizational-structure/offices/Pages/--Office-of-Financial-Education-and-Financial-Access.aspx).

-30-
