---
title: Financial Literacy and Education Commission to Hold Fourth Meeting
date: 2005-01-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2192
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions Wayne Abernathy will open the fourth meeting of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission tomorrow in the Treasury Department's Cash Room. U.S. Mint Director Henrietta Holsman Fore, Rep. Judy Biggert (IL), and Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. will deliver remarks to representatives of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission.  The Commission will also hear from guest speakers on best practices for financial education.

Treasury's Office of Financial Education coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, which is composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions.  The Commission works to improve financial literacy and education throughout the United States.

**WHAT**: Fourth Meeting of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission**WHO**:  Wayne Abernathy, Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions, Treasury DepartmentHenrietta Holsman Fore, Director, United States MintJudy Biggert, Member, U.S. House of RepresentativesDan Iannicola, Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education, Treasury Department**WHEN:**January 13, 200510:30 a.m. (EST)**WHERE:**Treasury DepartmentCash Room1500 Pennsylvania AvenueWashington, D.C.

News media without Treasury press credentials planning to attend should contact Frances Anderson in Treasury's Office of Public Affairs at (202) 622-2960 by 3 p.m. today with the following information: name, social security number and date of birth. This information may also be faxed to (202) 622-1999 or emailed to[frances.anderson@do.treas.gov](mailto:frances.anderson@do.treas.gov).
