---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Speaks to Savings Group about Strengthening Social Security
date: 2005-04-06
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2363
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2363

Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. today spoke to financial education public policy leaders at the American Savings Education Council (ASEC) General Meeting inWashington,D.C.Iannicola told today's participants that the President's efforts to strengthen the Social Security system are consistent with the group's work to increase personal financial security through increased savings.

For many years the American Savings Education Council has encouraged Americans to plan for their financial futures, said Iannicola.By working to strengthen Social Security the President is also looking ahead to help Americans secure their financial futures.

Dallas Salisbury, President and CEO of the Employment Benefit Research Institute, introduced Iannicola and also unveiled a new*Choose to Save*public service announcement, which will feature the[www.mymoney.gov](http://www.mymoney.gov/)Web site and 1-888-mymoney toll-free number recently launched by the Financial Literacy and Education Commission.Iannicola praised ASEC and its partners' dedication to improving financial education across the country.He also updated the participants on the progress of the commission to develop a national strategy for financial education, which will be released in June of 2005.Rep. Judy Biggert (IL) also participated in today's event to help promote the month of April as Financial Literacy Month.

ASEC is a nonprofit national coalition of public- and private-sector institutions undertaking initiatives to raise public awareness about what is needed to ensure long-term personal financial independence. ASEC's goal is to make saving and planning a vital concern of all Americans.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).
