---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Teaches Personal Finance Skills to Washington D.C. High Schools Students at Howard D. Woodson Senior High School Academy of Finance
date: 2005-02-17T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2262
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2262

Treasury's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola today taught personal finance skills on budgeting and managing credit wisely to thirty eleventh and twelfth grade students at Howard D. Woodson Senior High School Academy of Finance inWashington,D.C.During the lesson, Iannicola explained how the credit reporting system works and how to avoid common credit pitfalls.

Since young people frequently receive credit card solicitations, we need to make sure they are armed with the financial knowledge to make responsible choices before they make mistakes that could impact their credit reports for years to come, said Iannicola.  Today the students and I talked about how borrowing could have either a positive or a negative effect on one's life, depending on how it is used.

TheHowardD.WoodsonSenior High Schoolisorganized through several academies, andoffers its students an environment where they can explore various career paths.Today's financial education lesson with Mr. Iannicola was coordinated through the National Academy Foundation'sAcademyofFinance.The Academy of Finance prepares students for post-secondary education and careers through academic learning and hands-on work experiences.Students are exposed to broad career opportunities in the financial services industry.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education. Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, homeownership and retirement planning. The office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States. For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://home.treasury.gov/about/organizational-structure/offices/Pages/--Office-of-Financial-Education-and-Financial-Access.aspx)
