---
title: Treasury Designates Bin Laden, Qadi Associate
date: 2005-09-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2727
---
*(Archived Content)*

js-2727

The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated Dr. Abdul Latif Saleh pursuant to Executive Order 13224 for providing support to Usama bin Laden and al Qaida.

Saleh has multiple ties to al Qaida, ranging from the Al Haramain Foundation to Yasin Qadi to Usama bin Laden, said Stuart Levey, the Treasury's Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (TFI).  This designation identifies him as a terrorist facilitator and ensures that he will no longer be able to operate unencumbered.

Saleh is closely associated with Usama bin Laden and was expelled from Albania on suspicion of membership in a radical Islamic Jihad group.  Bin Laden provided Saleh with $600,000 to encourage the establishment of extremist groups in Albania.  In addition, Saleh is closely associated with a number of non-governmental organizations in Albania with links to the Egyptian Islamic Jihad, a terrorist organization tied to al Qaida.

Saleh founded and organized an Albanian jihadist organization that has been financed by the Al Haramain Foundation, a non-governmental organization linked to al Qaida.  The mission of the Albanian jihadist group has been to destabilize the internal situation in Albania by fomenting conflict among the different religious groups in the country.  AlHaramain recruited members from this organization, which Saleh directly assisted in vetting.

Saleh is also associated with Yasin Qadi, who was named a specially designated global terrorist by the Treasury Department in October 2001.  Qadi was known to be an active supporter of, and fundraiser for, Saleh's jihadist group.

Saleh and Qadi had entered into several business partnerships with one another, including a sugar importing business, a medical enterprise, and a construction business.  Saleh served as the general manager of all of Qadi's businesses in Albania and reportedly holds ten percent of the Qadi Group's investments in Albania.

In 1998, six individuals were arrested in Albania, two of which were tried and executed in Egypt as perpetrators of terrorist attacks.  In their testimony, the individuals said it was Saleh who had helped them come to Albania.  Saleh was identified as the one who had helped them in every respect, beginning with picking them up at the airport.

The United States is taking action today pursuant to United Nations Security Counsel Resolution 1617, which requires member states to financially isolate individuals and entities added to the UN 1267 Committee's consolidated list of terrorists tied to the Taliban, al Qaida and UBL.

Resolution 1617, recently adopted by the UN Security Council, makes the international sanctions regime against the Taliban, al Qaida, and its affiliate groups stronger, more accessible, and more transparent, Levey continued.  Today's action illustrates the power the global community now has to take unified, decisive action against al Qaida's support networks.

Identifier Information

Dr. Abdul Latif Saleh

A.K.A: SALEH, Abdul LatifA.A.

A.K.A: SALEH, Abdyl Latif

A.K.A: SALEH, Dr. Abd al-Latif

A.K.A: SALEH ABU HUSSEIN, Abdul Latif A.A.

A.K.A: SALIH, Abd al-Latif

A.K.A: Abu Amir

DOB: March 5, 1957

POB: Baghdad, Iraq

Citizenship: Jordanian/Albanian

Identification Numbers: Jordanian Passport Number D366 871

Last known residence: United Arab Emirates

Today's action prohibits any transactions between U.S. persons and Saleh and also freezes any assets he may have within U.S. jurisdiction.

-30-
