---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Helps Launch Unique Public Awareness and Financial Education Campaign with D.C. Students
date: 2005-05-04
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2432
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2432

Treasury's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education, Dan Iannicola, Jr., today participated in the opening ceremony for the*Stash Your Cash *financial education program **at the Kennedy Recreation Center in Washington, D.C. In addition to teaching young people about money in classrooms, the program will use large colorful piggy bank statutes to promote savings in the District of Columbia.

Iannicola addressed volunteers during the launch ceremony and visited with the children painting the large piggy banks, which will be displayed on D.C. sidewalks in May and June. Having these figures on the street is a fun and imaginative way to emphasize savings, said Iannicola. Parents can use them as a visible reminder for their children, and for themselves, about the importance of saving for their futures.

Iannicola also commended the classroom portion of the*Stash Your Cash*program. Learning to save at an early age is an important lesson that will benefit young people their whole lives through, he said. Whether it is saving for an education, a home or retirement, saving is something that everyone needs to do, but that many don't do. I'm glad to see today's effort to teach this crucial skill to our kids when it can truly change their lives.

Today's*Stash Your Cash*event marks the introduction of the interactive money management lesson in several D.C. middle schools. The purpose of the program is to engage the public and attract attention to the need of teaching students the important principles of saving, spending and sharing. Sponsoring the event were Capital One and the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).
