---
title: Economic Growth and Friendship Address at the Annual Meeting of the Inter-American Development Bank John B. Taylor Under Secretary for International Affairs United States Treasury Okinawa
date: 2005-04-10T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2371
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2371

President Iglesias, fellow Governors, ladies and gentlemen: on behalf of President Bush and Secretary Snow, I would like to thank the people of Japan for hosting our meeting.  It is fitting that Okinawa is the site for these meetings, showcasing the increasing integration of Latin America and the Caribbean with Asia, and the role of migration and remittances in economic development, as many Japanese migrants to Latin America came from Okinawa.

I join President Iglesias and the other Governors in welcoming the Republic of Korea into the Bank.  Korea's rich economic growth experience and renowned leadership in technology will be a tremendous benefit to the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.

U.S. Engagement with the Hemisphere

Much has changed since the last meeting hosted by Japan in 1991 in Nagoya.  At that time, some economies were reeling from the effects of raging triple-digit inflation and economic and financial strains were inevitably reflected in U.S. relations with countries of the region.

Economic conditions are much better now.  Growth has been close to six percent during the last year, the fastest growth in twenty-five years.  Inflation is only a small fraction of what it was then and economic stability is the rule rather than the exception.  Moreover, regional integration has increased significantly.  U.S. exports and imports with the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean now account for nineteen percent of total U.S. trade.  We also share an ambitious trade liberalization agenda based on a growing consensus that such integration is critical economic growth.

The United States remains strongly committed to economic development in the region.  Through the IDB and many bilateral dialogues such as the U.S.-Mexico Partnership for Prosperity and the U.S.-Brazil Group for Growth, we work together on issues ranging from remittance flows, to financial market integration, to lending to small businesses.

We are delighted to be working with some of the poorest countries Bolivia, Honduras and Nicaragua -- on the new Millennium Challenge Account.  The theme of ensuring measurable results that improve people's lives has been a common focus of our efforts.  And we will work hard to ensure that the Summit of the Americas in November in Argentina also yields measurable results.  We hope to see real progress on small business lending, remittances, reducing the time to start a business, and promoting high-return infrastructure projects.

Strong Economic Growth in the Region

Improved economic policies and strong economic leadership in Latin America is clearly the reason for the improvement in economic growth and economic stability. Improvements in fiscal policies have reduced debt levels.  Monetary authorities are pursuing price stability and exchange rate regimes that better reflect fundamentals.  These reforms build financial stability and confidence, leading to increasing capital flows, higher levels of investment, and rapid export growth.

And economic expansion is expected to continue.  Private forecasters are expecting growth of 4 percent this year.  This is good news, but we all know the region can and should do better.  Decades of sustained high growth are needed to bring down poverty rates.

I see two major challenges for sustained growth.  The first challenge is to lock-in the recent improvements in macroeconomic policy by putting in place fiscal responsibility regimes that discipline budget planning and execution and by supporting the successful low inflation monetary policies.  The second challenge is to build on the macroeconomic foundation and concentrate on microeconomic reform including trade liberalization and the reduction of burdensome regulation in order to unleash job creation by entrepreneurs both small and large.

Progress at the ID

The IDB plays a critical role in the region.  I am delighted with the replenishment of the MIF and the major improvements in procurement and internal controls.  As I said at the signing ceremony, MIF is taking the lead in remittances, which are a source for investment in the region.  I welcome the new Private Sector Coordinator, who is off to a fast start in his work to help us improve the Bank group's private sector efforts.  And we are very pleased to have reached agreement on a New Lending Framework, which provides needed resources while committing to results measurement, robust fiduciary controls, and sound macroeconomic policies.

The new procurement policies adopted by the IDB this year represent an important reform, as do increasing transparency, improving efficiency by promoting competition, aligning the Bank with best practices.  In addition, the Bank has made commendable progress in improving information disclosure, internal and external audits, and internal controls.  The IDB led the way among the multilateral development banks with the disclosure of Board minutes.  The United States will continue to urge for more progress in other areas, such as the prior disclosure of Board documents.

The Private Sector

We believe that the role of the Bank in supporting economic growth in Latin America and the Caribbean must focus even more on the private sector to remain relevant.  The Bank must continue with vigor the efforts begun last year to improve the coordination, efficiency and effectiveness of the Group's private sector activities.

Within the private sector small and medium businesses create the most jobs, but small business growth is frequently undermined by inadequate access to the credit needed for investment or startup.  The leaders at the 2004 Summit of Americas urged the IDB to help triple credit for small business.  The MOU between the IIC and the MIF was signed to facilitate the achievement of this goal.  We strongly support expanded MIF efforts in microfinance and urge the IIC to work with its commercial bank partners to help them profitably make smaller loans to smaller clients.

A flourishing private sector requires a pro-business microeconomic environment unencumbered by the barriers of corruption.  I welcome the IDB's Business Climate Initiative and the private sector focus in Country Strategies.  We also support IDB's work on countries' governance reform efforts.

Conclusion

In conclusion let me say that I have greatly enjoyed working with the IDB and the people in the region during the past four years.  In our mutual quest for higher growth and poverty reduction, I have renewed old friendships and made new ones.

As I reflect on what we as a hemisphere have experienced together, the IDB has been a constant and active participant in both word and deed.  Its willingness to engage in challenging situations is widely recognized and I appreciate the important changes, especially the greater focus on economic growth through economic freedom.  The United States will continue to work with our regional partners and the IDB.  The IDB is critical to the success of the region, and its active engagement and leadership is fundamental during the upcoming period of political transition and economic expansion.

Thank you.
