---
title: Secretary John W. Snow Prepared Remarks to Bozeman Community Leaders Bozeman, MT
date: 2005-03-30T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2346
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2346

Thank you so much for having me here; it's great to be in Bozeman!

I really appreciate the chance to talk with you today about strengthening the nation's Social Security system. The President's leadership on this issue is providing our country with a tremendous opportunity to save Social Security for current and near retirees and improve it for younger generations. Conversations like this are an important part of reaching decisions as to what, exactly, should be done.

Since March 3rd, Administration officials - from President Bush and Vice President Cheney to Cabinet members like me and policy experts - have been traveling throughout the country as part of a coordinated 60-day tour of at least 60 stops to discuss the President's message of strengthening Social Security with the American people.

I was in Pennsylvania last Thursday, meeting with business leaders to discuss Social Security and that visit marked the 60 stop mark, after less than 30 days on the road. So we know that the final number of stops will be much higher than anticipated.

Right before that trip to Pennsylvania, we were reminded of the serious nature of the Social Security problem yesterday, back in Washington, DC, when the Social Security and Medicare Trustees - for whom I serve as Board Chairman - issued our annual report on the financial health if the programs' trust funds. The numbers contained in the Social Security report leave little doubt that the system is financially unsustainable, and in need of expeditious and lasting change.

The Trustees' report showed that Social Security cash flows peak in 2008 and turn negative in 2017, and the trust fund itself will be exhausted in 2041. The unfunded obligation, that is, the difference between the present values of Social Security inflows (plus the trust fund) and outflows, is $11.1 trillion on a permanent basis, and $4.0 trillion over the next 75 years.

Now, the President doesn't believe that we should make up that shortfall with tax increases. The report showed just how much we would have to raise taxes to achieve long-term balance: the payroll tax rate would have to be raised immediately by 3.5 percentage points to make the system whole on a permanent basis. In other words, the payroll tax would have to be increased by nearly 30 percent.

That kind of tax increase would have significant, negative economic repercussions. Every worker in America would start taking home less pay, and that's bad for you, it's bad for your families, and it's bad for countless facets of our economy.

Employers would bear a significant cost, as well. Employers would shoulder half of the payroll tax increase because they pay that tax on all of their employees.

For very small employers, I fear that much of a tax increase would force them to make terrible choices, from lay-offs to health benefit cuts. And it would make hiring new people even more difficultwhich is worrisome since small business creates most of our nation's new jobs.

Increasing payroll taxes hurts the economy and it hurts job creation, period. That's why the President is against it.

It is also worth noting that payroll tax increases have been the standard solution to Social Security's problems, and they have never solved the problem! Payroll taxes have been raised some 20 times since Social Security was established - and it has failed to make the system solvent.

Tax increases aren't the answer, so the President has encouraged the Congress to propose a variety of ideas that might be, and he has put a number of ideas on the table as well.

When the President took this issue to the country in his State of the Union Address, he said his objective was to engender a broad national dialogue to get people talking about this issue. He wanted Americans to talk about Social Security, and a national conversation has begun as a direct result.

Today, people are talking about the issue from the halls of Congress to the halls of local shopping malls! The President's leadership has drawn critical attention to the problem and is creating movement. Progress, real progress, is being made.

Over lunch counters, over breakfast and dinner tables all over Americathe topic is Social Security reform. It's the front page story in virtually every newspaper. It's on the evening news. And it's there because of the President of the United States. It's there because of the courage that he's had to directly confront and deal with what so many in political life call the third rail.

The American people respect leaders who call a spade a spade. The President touched the third rail without fear, and now we're moving forward. Neighbors and co-workers are talking about it; families are talking about it; Congress is talking about it.

 

We've seen a clear shift in the course of the last month or so from the question: Is there a problem? to the question: How do we fix it?

I imagine that you are talking about it with your spouse and family members, your colleagues and neighbors. Those conversations are critical, and I hope our meeting here today can help make them even more lively, more productive.

I know that you understand that if you are 55 or older your Social Security benefits are solid. They will not change. You know that you don't need to change your retirement plan or strategy because of Social Security reform, period.

But now I'll ask: how many of you have children or grandchildren? It's those children and grandchildren, those young workers and future workers, who we need to be worried about. They are the ones for whom we need to fix this system.

The issue of Social Security is really a matter of basic arithmetic, and the threat to Social Security in the near future makes more sense when you look at the simple arithmetic. Social Security has enough money now because for decades we have had more than enough workers paying into the system, supporting the retirees drawing benefits.

In 1950, there were 16 workers to support every beneficiary of Social Security - a very comfortable ratio of those paying in versus those drawing benefits. Today there are only 3.3 workers supporting every beneficiary. By the time today's youngest workers - many of you have children in that age group - turn 65, there will only be two workers supporting each retiree.

Just three years from now, in 2008, the first baby boomers will begin to retire. According to the new Trustees' report, the government will begin to pay out more in Social Security benefits than it collects in payroll taxes in 2017 - that's just 12 years from now. By 2041, when younger workers begin to retire, the system will be bankrupt.

We must make Social Security better for those younger workers.

Raising their payroll taxes won't make it better. What the President would like to see, instead, for future generations is an ability to save some of their payroll taxes, to build a nest egg that belongs to them, not to the government. Something they could pass on to their heirs. A nest egg that would draw on the powerful force of compound interest to give workers the prospect of a retirement that is far better than the rapidly-weakening promise of Social Security benefits.

With voluntary personal accounts, younger workers would have the chance to learn about their financial choices, build a nest egg and benefit from sound long-term investment in the free market system without disrupting the system of benefits for today's retired beneficiaries.

For the life of me, I can't imagine why anybody would argue against young workers having the ability to invest and build a better retirement for their future. It costs the Social Security system nothing to do so, it will cost current and near-retirees nothing, it gives our children and grandchildren a better retirement, and it helps our country create a larger pool of savings. And as the president has said the retirement security of our young people is too important for partisan politics. Why wouldn't we do this? I have not heard one good reason not to and it's hard to figure out why anybody would oppose it.

Additionally, as former Democratic Congressmen Tim Penny and Charlie Stenholm wrote in an op-ed recently, opposing personal accounts is not a substitute for offering a positive solution for dealing with the challenges that face Social Security. They went on to say, astutely, that they believe that if Social Security were being created from scratch today, Americans would want to include a way to help everyone build up a nest egg. The President and I couldn't agree more.

Social Security reform that doesn't raise payroll tax rates, that protects benefits for today's seniors, and that improves the system dramatically for our children and grandchildren can be achieved.

We are part of an exciting moment in American history, where a President's courageous leadership has inspired a national discussion and, I'm confident, will lead to historic results. I encourage you to be involved, whether it's talking about the issue with your colleagues, with your children, or writing a letter to your Members of Congress.

If we act now, we can make sure that Social Security, and our economy, are on sound financial footing for our children and grandchildren.

Thanks so much, again, for having me here today.
