---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Promotes Financial Literacy Month in Rhode Island
date: 2005-04-13T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2376
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2376

Treasury's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education, Dan Iannicola, Jr., today participated in several financial education events in Providence, Rhode Island, to promote April as Financial Literacy Month. Iannicola keynoted at the Rhode Island Financial Literacy Leaders' Luncheon, delivering a presentation to state policymakers and community leaders. While in Providence, Iannicola also delivered remarks at the Financial Literacy Month Proclamation Ceremony alongside Governor Donald Carcieri and several other state dignitaries.

At the luncheon, Iannicola thanked financial education leaders for their hard work. Your grassroots involvement in financial education is making a difference here in Rhode Island, said Iannicola.

At the proclamation ceremony, he also thanked Governor Carcieri and Rhode Island Jump$tart staff for encouraging financial education efforts in the state year round. Today's impressive showing by so many state-wide office holders reflects a true commitment to raise financial literacy across the state.

 

Today's financial education events were organized by the Rhode Island Jump$tart for Personal Financial Literacy with the purpose of increasing awareness among policy makers and the public about significant personal finance issues in the marketplace, and informing people about financial education resources available free from the government. The Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy seeks to improve the personal financial literacy of young adults.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).
