---
title: Statement of Treasury Secretary John W. Snow On the Departure of Acting Treasury Assistant Secretary for Management Jesus H. Delgado-Jenkins
date: 2005-04-18
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2391
---
*(Archived Content)*

js-2391

In a few days, the Treasury Department will bid farewell to one of its most admired leaders and dedicated servants. Since May of 2003, Jesus Delgado-Jenkins has served the Treasury Department, and his country, well and honorably.

Jesus' work to help realize the President's management vision for the federal government through the President's Management Agenda was invaluable, and he will be missed by his Treasury colleagues.

Of his many accomplishments at Treasury, Jesus' assistance with the creation of the new Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (TFI) stands out as one that presented special challenges and great rewards. I know that Jesus is proud to have played a part in protecting our country through the successful launch of this new office.

Dedicated to promoting economic opportunity and ownership and to building an effective, results-driven government, Jesus has been a valued member of the Bush Administration. Under his management leadership, the Office of Management and Budget designated Treasury as a Center of Excellence for the Financial Services Line of Business a reflection of the leadership and skill demonstrated by the financial and accounting professionals at the department, and the successful guidance that Jesus provided them with. In addition, he renewed our budgeting and financial management strategies as well as our acquisition strategies to improve the Department's cost of operations.

Jesus has much to be proud of as he leaves this department for the private sector. On behalf of my Treasury colleagues, I extend gratitude for his service and best wishes for the future to Jesus.

**REPORTS**

- [Acting Asst. Secretary Delgado-Jenkins' Resignation Letter](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/jdjresignation.pdf)
