---
title: Statement of Sandra L. Pack Nominee for Assistant Secretary for Management U.S. Department of the Treasury before the Senate Finance Committee
date: 2005-07-20
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/200572011231417937
---
*(Archived Content)*

2005-7-20-11-23-14-17937

 

Chairman Grassley, Ranking Member Baucus and members of the Senate Finance Committee, thank you for taking the time to consider my nomination.  I am honored that President Bush has nominated me to serve in this position.  I also thank Secretary Snow for his leadership and support.

Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce my husband, Randall, to you and to the members of the Committee.

Now, I would like to tell you a little bit about my background and why I believe that I am qualified for this position.  I am a Certified Public Accountant. Throughout my professional career, including twelve years in public accounting, two years as Assistant Secretary of the Army for Financial Management and Comptroller, and two terms as Chief Financial Officer for the Bush/Cheney presidential campaign committees, I have demonstrated a commitment to the principles of sound financial management.  I understand the need for the principles and practices espoused by my profession, such as, strong internal controls, segregation of duties, planning, budgeting, and reliable accounting and financial reporting systems.  These principles enable sound management and resource decisions.

If confirmed, while I will be serving in a new environment with the U.S. Treasury Department, I believe that my technical training and my previous work experience will provide the foundation needed for the challenge.  I look forward to learning about the U.S. Treasury Department and determining how the principles with which I am familiar may be applied.

Mr. Chairman, thank you again for bringing me before this Committee.

-30-
