---
title: Anna Escobedo Cabral to be Sworn in as U.S. Treasurer Secretary Snow and Sen. Hatch to Deliver Remarks
date: 2005-01-18T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2199
---
*(Archived Content)*

Anna Escobedo Cabral will be sworn in by Treasury Secretary John W. Snow as the 42nd U.S. Treasurer today at 3:30 p.m. EST in the Treasury Department's Cash Room. U.S. Sen. Orrin G. Hatch will join Secretary Snow and Treasurer Cabral for the ceremony.

As Treasurer, Cabral will advise the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Director of the United States Mint and the Director of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing on matters relating to coinage, currency and the production of other instruments by the United States. Cabral will also serve as a spokesperson for Treasury on a range of issues before the Department. President Bush nominated her to the post on July 22, 2004 and the U.S. Senate confirmed Cabral on November 20, 2004.

At today's swearing in, Secretary Snow will deliver remarks about the role of the U.S. Treasurer as it relates to financial education and financial literacy and he will place special emphasis on one of the great financial responsibilities of our nation: strengthening Social Security for our children and grandchildren.

**WHAT **Swearing In Ceremony for 42nd U.S. Treasurer** WHO **Treasury Secretary John W. SnowTreasurer Anna Escobedo CabralSen. Orrin G. Hatch** WHEN **January 19, 20053:30 p.m. (EST)** WHERE**Treasury DepartmentCash Room1500 Pennsylvania AvenueWashington, D.C.

News media without Treasury press credentials planning to attend should contact Frances Anderson in Treasury's Office of Public Affairs at (202) 528-9086 a.s.a.p. today with the following information: name, Social Security number and date of birth. This information may also be faxed to (202) 622-1999 or emailed to[frances.anderson@do.treas.gov](mailto:frances.anderson@do.treas.gov).

- 30 -
