---
title: Anna Escobedo Cabral Sworn in as U.S. Treasurer
date: 2005-01-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2203
---
*(Archived Content)*

   

JS-2203

**  Anna Escobedo Cabral was sworn in today by Secretary John W. Snow as the 42nd U.S. Treasurer. President Bush nominated her to the post on July 22, 2004 and the U.S. Senate confirmed Cabral on November 20, 2004.**Anna Escobedo Cabral was sworn in today by Secretary John W. Snow as the 42nd U.S. Treasurer. President Bush nominated her to the post on July 22, 2004 and the U.S. Senate confirmed Cabral on November 20, 2004.

As Treasurer, Cabral will advise the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Director of the United States Mint and the Director of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing on matters relating to coinage, currency and the production of other instruments by the United States. Cabral will also

serve as a spokesperson for Treasury on a range of issues before the Department.

Prior to joining the Administration, Cabral served as Director of the Smithsonian Institution's Center for Latino Initiatives, where she led a pan-institutional effort to improve Latino representation in exhibits, and public programming among the Institution's 19 museums, five research centers, and the National Zoo. From 1999 to 2003, Cabral served as President and CEO of the Hispanic Association on Corporate Responsibility, a non-profit organization which partners with Fortune 500 companies to increase Hispanic representation in employment, procurement, philanthropy and governance. Under her leadership, the organization published a best practices series, and instituted a partnership with Harvard Business School to provide executive training programs in Corporate Governance Best Practices to community leaders.

From 1993 to 1999, Cabral served as Deputy Staff Director for the United States Senate Judiciary Committee under Chairman Orrin G. Hatch. Additionally, beginning in 1991, she served as Executive Staff Director of the U.S. Senate Republican Conference Task Force on Hispanic Affairs, a caucus of 25 senators dedicated to ensuring that the concerns and needs of the Hispanic community are addressed by Congress through legislation.

A native of California, Cabral majored in political science at the University of California, Davis and earned a Master's degree in Public Administration with an emphasis in international trade and finance from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.

-30-
