---
title: 'Treasury''s Office of Financial Education Offers Financial Counseling to Hurricane Evacuees'
date: 2005-09-28
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2955
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free Adobe Acrobat Reader.*

JS-2955

Treasury's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. led a team of financial educators at the Disaster Recovery Center in Baton Rouge , LA today, where they are providing financial education and counseling to those affected by recent hurricanes.  The team also distributed materials providing financial tips and resources for those displaced by the storms.

Over the last few weeks, the Office of Financial Education has provided counseling and materials at five hurricane relief sites including the Astrodome complex in Houston, TX; the Red Cross Center at Kelly USA in San Antonio, TX; the One-Stop Joint Assistance Center in Pensacola, FL; the DC Armory in Washington, DC; and the Disaster Recovery Center in Baton Rouge, LA. The FDIC played a key role in helping Treasury perform some of this outreach.

"Right now is the point in the recovery process when evacuees are trying to make the most of their limited funds, while dealing with financial issues and avoiding frauds and scams.  Our teams have been on the ground to help our neighbors from the Gulf Coast  states get a handle on these topics while they work to put their lives back together," said Iannicola. "There is never a bad time for financial education, but at some points in life it is especially helpful.  That is the case here."

In addition to offering one-on-one counseling, Treasury developed a brochure entitled "Weathering the Storm:   Financial Tips and Resources for Hurricane Recovery," which describes federal, state and local financial information resources for individuals affected by Hurricane Katrina or Hurricane Rita.   The resources listed in the brochure cover the states of Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas. The brochure has been distributed at various shelters and resource centers across the country through government agencies and private sector organizations, and is also available on the Financial Literacy and Education Commission's website, <[www.mymoney.gov](http://www.mymoney.gov/)>, and the Treasury's website, <[www.treasury.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education)>.
