---
title: U.S. Treasurer Cabral to Attend World’s Fair of Money in San Francisco
date: 2005-07-25T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2651
---
*(Archived Content)*

U.S. Treasurer Anna Escobedo Cabral will join the nation's security printer, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing (BEP), at the American Numismatic Associations' (ANA) World's Fair of Money Show Wednesday. Treasurer Cabral will attend the World's Fair of Money Ribbon Cutting Ceremony as well as a Treasurer's Forum to discuss various topics relating to Treasury initiatives and financial education. Treasurer Cabral advises the Secretary of the Treasury on coin and currency issues and serves as one of the Department's principal advisors and spokespeople in the area of financial education.

For the first time ever, the BEP will exhibit currency face plates, dating back to 1934, which were used to manufacture the $500 and $10,000 currency denominations with the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank designation. Additionally, the BEP will showcase its Billion Dollar Exhibit which features more than a billion dollars of antique currency, Treasury bonds, and gold and silver certificates.

Representatives from the BEP will be on hand to show and sell United States paper currency in uncut sheets and other novelty forms. A technical expert on currency production will be available to answer questions. One of the BEP's Plate Printers will be demonstrating on the antique (more than 100-year old) Spider Press during the convention.

In honor of this expo, the BEP is introducing the ANA – World's Fair of Money Intaglio Print card which features the back of the Series 1882 $10 National Currency Note and a vignette of Yosemite National Park.

The BEP will also showcase the Series 2003A $1 uncut sheets of currency which bear the signatures of Treasury Secretary John W. Snow and Treasurer Cabral. Series 2003 $2 sheets of uncut currency produced for the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank will also be displayed.

San Francisco Evolutions premium product will debut at this show and features the Series 2004 $20 and $50 uncirculated notes with matching low serial numbers from the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (this is the first in a series of 12 – one set from each of the Federal Reserve Banks will be offered in the near future).

Additional information regarding the BEP and its products may be found online at:[www.moneyfactory.com](http://www.moneyfactory.com/).

**Who **U.S. Treasurer Anna Escobedo Cabral** What **The American Numismatic Association – World's Fair of Money ShowTreasurer's Forum** When **Wednesday, July 27, 200511:00 a.m. PDT** Where**The Moscone West Convention Center800 Howard StreetSan Francisco, CA
