---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Recognizes Business Community Involvement in Youth Financial Education Efforts
date: 2005-03-09
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2304
---
*(Archived Content)*



JS-2304



Treasury's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. today addressed business and education leaders at a board meeting of the Junior Achievement National Capital Area Office.Iannicola commended the businesses represented at the meeting for their support of financial education for youth through their work with Junior Achievement in the Washington D.C., metropolitan area.Businesses at the meeting have contributed funds to Junior Achievement and have sent their executives into classrooms to teach lessons on business, personal finance, economics and free enterprise.



Iannicola explained to the group that business leaders are uniquely positioned to help both young people and their own organizations by increasing the financial literacy of America's youth.He encouraged the executives to continue their efforts and to spread the word among their private sector peers that there is still more to do in the effort to bring financial education to all of our young people.



Supporting financial education is not just a*nice*thing for companies to do, it is a*smart*thing to do.Young people with an understanding of money and business will be better consumers and better employees and this benefits the private sector, said Iannicola.The companies at today's meeting understand that financial education for young people is an investment with a good return.



Junior Achievement of the National Capital Area educates children on America's free enterprise system. Junior Achievement is a non-profit organization dedicated to educating young people about business, economics and free enterprise.The organization's programs span grades K-12, with curricula designed to teach elementary students about their roles as individuals, workers and consumers, and to prepare middle and high school students for key economic and workforce issues.



The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.



The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout theUnited States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).
