---
title: Treasury and IRS Propose Regulations
date: 2005-09-29T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2956
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free AdobeAcrobatReader. *

JS-2956

**WASHINGTON  ,  DC  --** The Treasury Department and IRS today issued proposed regulations on deferred compensation under section 409A.  Section 409A governs plans and arrangements that provide nonqualified deferred compensation to employees, directors or other service providers.   These regulations implement new provisions established by the American Jobs Creation Act (AJCA).

The proposed regulations announced today identify which plans and arrangements are covered under section 409A, outline operational requirements for deferral elections and permissible timing for deferred compensation payments made under the rules.

The rules also extend the deadline for documentary compliance with the new rules toDecember 31, 2006.  The deadline was initially December 31, 2005.

The proposed regulations provide a framework for implementing the requirements of section 409A, taking into account the numerous comments received from the public on Notice 2005-1, issued last December.

The effective date proposed for the regulations isJanuary 1, 2007.  Taxpayers may rely on the proposed regulations until final regulations are effective.

**REPORTS**

- [A copy of the proposed regulations](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/reg15808004.pdf)
