---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Addresses Financial Education Leaders at the 2005 National Summit on Economic and Financial Literacy
date: 2005-03-03T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2293
---
*(Archived Content)*

js-2293

Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. addressed business leaders, educators and policy makers at the 2005 National Summit on Economic and Financial Literacy at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C. today. The summit's theme this year, Education for an Ownership Society, underscored the importance of economic and financial literacy for all Americans and the benefits it can bring to people's lives. The summit was hosted by the National Council on Economic Education.

Iannicola highlighted the launch of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission's federal financial education web site,[http://www.mymoney.gov](http://www.mymoney.gov), and toll-free hotline, 1-888-mymoney. This one-stop shop for free federal financial education resources gives consumers an easy way to get information on a variety of personal finance topics.

Iannicola praised the organizations participating in today's Summit for their work in improving financial education across the country, particularly in schools. The National Council on Economic Education is an important partner in our work at Treasury to bring economic literacy to this nation's young people, said Iannicola.  Through their national network of educators and financial education supporters, the NCEE is working hard to find a home for financial education in every classroom in America. Today, we salute their progress.

The NCEE is a non-profit organization that promotes economic literacy for students and their teachers. NCEE's mission is to help students develop the real-life skills they need to succeed, including honing saving and investing skills to become effective participants in a global economy.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, homeownership and retirement planning.  The office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).
