---
title: U. S. Treasury Officials Join Bankers in Schools Across the Nation to Promote Financial Education
date: 2005-10-20T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2982
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2982

The U.S. Treasury partnered with the American Bankers Association Education Foundation today for the third annual Get Smart About Credit Day.Nine Treasury officials teamed up with bankers across the nation and visited nearly 900 students in high schools, universities and continuing education classes to teach students how to budget, use credit cards and build a positive payment history.

Today in classrooms across the country bankers and Treasury officials are teaching our young people that they have the power to determine their financial futures, said Treasury's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. By learning to use credit of all types wisely, young people can avoid things like garnishments and bankruptcy, and can make possible things like a car, a home and a college education.  The choice is entirely theirs, and today we're here to help them make the right one.

The ABA Education Foundation, a non-profit subsidiary of the American Bankers Association, is committed to developing and providing education programs that lead to financial literacy.The foundation has supported the banking industry's efforts to teach personal finance skills in schools and communities across the country.It provides programs that are specifically and uniquely created for young children, teenagers and adults to provide them with the skills they need to budget, save, and manage credit.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education. Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning. The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States. For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).
