---
title: Secretary Snow Visits Hartford, Connecticut on Monday to Discuss Strengthening and Preserving Social Security
date: 2005-05-06T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2431
---
*(Archived Content)*

U.S. Treasury Secretary John W. Snow will be inHartford,Connecticuton Monday, May 9 to discuss the President's efforts to strengthen and preserve the U.S. Social Security system.

To keep the promise of Social Security alive for our children and grandchildren, we need to fix Social Security now once and for all, said Secretary Snow. We cannot pretend the problem doesn't exist. The fact is, Social Security will go broke when our young workers get ready to retire. Every year we wait the problem becomes worse for our children.

If we do not act to fix Social Security now, the only solutions will be dramatically higher taxes, massive new borrowing or sudden and severe cuts in Social Security benefits or other government programs.

The President is committed to saving Social Security and haslaid out some basic principles. He wants to preserve benefits for current and near-retirees while saving and strengthening the system for future generations. ThePresident has pledged to work with Congress to find the most effective combination of reforms.

The following event is open to credentialed media with photo identification (credentials must be visible at all times):

Roundtable with Connecticut Business and Industry AssociationRemarks350 Church StreetHartford, CT**9:00 a.m. EDT**Media must RSVP to Nancy Andrews at 860-244-1957**Media must arrive by 8:15 a.m. EDT**A brief media availability will be held immediately following the event**
