---
title: Secretary John W. Snow Prepared Statement following the Meeting of the G-7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors
date: 2005-04-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2384
---
*(Archived Content)*



js-2384



I was delighted to host G-7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governorsover the last two days; we've had a very successful meeting.



We are pleased to see the global economy continuing its expansion. Theoutlook continues to be favorable for 2005, despite the unwelcome news ofoil prices, and we all agreed that improving growth must be our toppriority.



The United States remains a leading contributor to the global expansion.Real GDP rose 4.4 percent in 2004 on an average annual basis, the largest infive years. Evidence so far on the first quarter points to continuedstrength. Job growth has been revitalized, with the economy creating 3.1million new jobs since the employment trough of May 2003. Inflation remainsmoderate. These achievements reflect well-timed execution ofcarefully-designed monetary and fiscal policies.



The U.S. is strongly committed to reducing the budget deficit.  We recognizethat this is vital for continued robust growth for the U.S. economy as wellas for the international financial system.   We are also committed toreducing the longer term deficit which reflects our unsustainable, unfundedobligations such as Social Security.



The Administration expects a deficit of $427 billion this fiscal year. At3.5 percent of GDP, this is substantially lower than the 4.5 - 6 percentexperienced at times in the 1980s and 1990s, but still too large.  Deficitsmatter, they are unwelcome, and must come down.  And with tight controls ondiscretionary spending and increased revenue stemming from the expandingeconomy, we expect to cut the deficit in half to well under 2% of GDP by2009.



Colleagues have asked me about the President's effort to reform ourretirement system.   The President's  initiative to reform the SocialSecurity system is an important part of the United States' economic future.We must plan for the future and that means dealing with looming financialthreats when we see them. In the case of Social Security, there is nodenying the demographic reality that will lead to insolvency of the system.The President has initiated a national dialogue that we hope will encouragethe Congress to enact swift and meaningful reform to preserve, protect andstrengthen Social Security for all generations of American workers.



The Bush Administration is also pursuing reform of the U.S. tax code, whichhas grown too long, complicated and cumbersome - a poor match for ourflexible, free-market economy. The President has appointed an advisory panelto study the problems of the current code and propose potential solutions,keeping in mind that any new system of taxation must achieve increasedfairness, simplicity and ease of understanding, as well as promote economicgrowth and job creation.



We each face our own challenges and responsibilities, like Social Securityand tax code reform, but global adjustment is a shared responsibility. TheUnited States is doing its part to reduce the fiscal deficit. Growth inparts of Europe and in Japan remain modest, leaving the global recovery lessbalanced than it had been. Europe and Japan must step up to the challengesof structural reform in order to build up the foundation for growth. The G7Ministers agree on the need for greater growth in the world economyparticularly among the large industrialized economies.  We are committed toreducing the barriers to growth which we find in each of our economies asreflected in our Agenda for Growth.  This is an action-oriented program forreforms to which we are all committed.



I want to comment specifically on China in this context. China's strongeconomic growth has made a tremendous contribution to the global economy.China has taken numerous steps over the last few  years, including preparingfor greater flexibility in their exchange rate, introducing foreign exchangemarket financial products and strengthening banks and bank supervision.With this groundwork in place, China is ready now to adopt a more flexibleexchange rate.



Energy issues were a subject of intense discussion during our meetings. Highenergy prices act as a drag on the global expansion. In the United States,President Bush is concerned about the impact of high gas prices on Americanfamilies and our economy.  We feel strongly that the U.S. Congress must actto pass comprehensive energy legislation. President Bush put forth anational energy policy four years ago that addresses both supply and demand,and America has waited long enough for Congress to act. It is time to putpartisanship aside and enact energy legislation.



Extending the benefits of growth to all the world's citizens remains a keypriority for the United States and for the G-7.  The U.S. commitment isclear - for instance, we have nearly doubled our development assistancesince 2000 to help boost growth and reduce poverty in developing countriesand tripled aid to sub-Saharan Africa. The next step, in our view, is toextend 100 percent reduction of HIPC countries' IDA and African Fund debt.We believe that the tide is shifting in favor of such a cancellationapproach.



For its part, the IMF needs to substantially improve its engagement inlow-income countries. A major step forward in this regard is the agreementamong the G-7 this weekend to support a new policy monitoring arrangement inthe IMF. This type of facility would allow low income countries to engageintensively with the Fund, even when they do not face balance of paymentsfinancing needs and without increasing their debt.   I urge the IMFC to moveforward on this important step later today.   We also called for the IMF tomake its low income lending more responsive to short-term adjustment needs.



More broadly with respect to the Bretton Woods institutions, we had theopportunity to assess progress under the Strategic Review that was initiatedin the G-7 and that is now being carried through in the institutionsthemselves.  Fundamental for both institutions is the need to clarify theunderlying missions, to set priorities in line with their missions so thatthey can deliver results while avoiding budget creep. In the IMF,surveillance can and must be further improved, and we all agreed to worktogether to accomplish this in particular by pushing for the IMF to providedebt sustainability assessments separately from proposed lending programs.In the World Bank, key concerns are enhancing transparency andaccountability, particularly with respect to internal controls, andimplementing improvements in results measurement.



We are grateful to Jim Wolfensohn for the extraordinary leadership he hasprovided for the World Bank. I was pleased by the welcome my colleaguesextended to Paul Wolfowitz as the new President. Paul is an outstandingleader whose proven management skills, vision and commitment to developmentI believe can and will take the Bank and the international effort to promotedevelopment to a new level. We laid out some shared priorities today that webelieve provide an ambitious agenda for the Bank.



Another key item on our agenda was fighting the financing of terrorism. Weagreed on the importance of strengthening the process of multilateral assetfreezing, in line with UN resolutions, improving information sharing, andexploring the possibility of broadening the application of new financialtools to disrupt all illicit activity.



Before closing, I want to note that I look forward to meeting later todaywith G-7 Ministers and our counterparts from Russia and the Broader MiddleEast and North Africa. This is an important initiative that has generatedpromising energy. I expect that we will continue our constructive dialogueon how the G8/BMENA partnership can promote job creation, privateinvestment, and economic prosperity.



Thank you.
