---
title: Deputy Assistant Secretary Iannicola Teaches Personal Finance Skills to Middle School Students in Las Vegas
date: 2005-05-13T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2445
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2445

Treasury's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. today spoke to Garside Middle School students about the importance of planning for their financial futures. He taught them a personal finance lesson, which focused on savings, controlling spending and credit management.

Iannicola praised the classroom teacher for her efforts to integrate financial education lessons into her course.

Ms. Bautista understands the importance of financial education for young people and she's doing something about it, said Iannicola. By integrating financial concepts into her math lessons, she has found a way to teach her students what they need to know in both disciplines without having to choose between the two.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the Office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The Office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, home ownership and retirement planning.  The Office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the Office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education).
