---
title: 'World Economic Forum''s Informal Gathering of World Economic Leaders Working Together to Raise Economic Growth in the Broader Middle East and North Africa John B. Taylor Under Secretary for International Affairs United States Treasury'
date: 2005-02-03T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2228
---
*(Archived Content)*

js-2228

I would like to thank the World Economic Forum for inviting me to participate in this exchange of ideas with officials from the Middle East/North Africa region and the G8 countries.I believe that the practical initiatives that emerge from such exchanges can greatly benefit the people of the region.

Indeed, for more than a year, the United Statesand other G8 countries along with the countries from the Broader Middle East andNorth Africahave been engaging in a dialogue with the aim of creating initiatives to benefit the people in the region. Last summerthe leaders from the G8 and Broader Middle East and North African countries agreed at theSummitinSea Island,Georgia, to pursue a series of bold initiatives, including the*Forum for the Future*.The Forum supports efforts to advance freedom, democracy and prosperity in the region.

U.S. Treasury Secretary John Snow led the finance channel of the Forum during its start-up phase.He hosted several meetings with regional finance and economic ministers - beginning inDubaiin 2003 and continuing with two meetings inWashingtonin 2004.And most recently, just last December he joined Moroccan Finance Minister Oualalou to co-chair the finance ministers' component of the Forum for the Future inRabat.The ministers meeting together as a group for the first time last year developed a joint vision of what is needed to answer the region's call to increase economic growth and reduce poverty.I believe that this new partnership is one of the most important and exciting developments in the area of international economiccooperation in many years. I am happy to say thatU.K.Chancellor Brown and the new Bahraini Finance Minister Al-Khalifa will co-chair the finance ministers' channel this year and are already planning a meeting inWashingtonin the spring.

And there is much to do.True, notable progress has been made in the region with per capita income in the region rising to $2,080 in 2000 from $1,800 in 1985.But stronger economic growth must be achieved to address the region's economic and social challenges in the 21stcentury. According to the widely cited 2002 UNDP Arab Human Development Report, within twenty years theMiddle EastandNorth Africaregion's total population is expected to exceed 400 million. Nearly 38 percent of the region's approximately 280 million inhabitants are under the age of 14. Projections are that the working age population in theMiddle EastandNorth Africawill increase by about 50 million in the next ten years.Unemployment in region is 15 percent, with unemployment exceeding 20 percent inAlgeria, theWest BankandGaza,Libya, andMorocco.

How can the necessary economic growth be achieved? The broad consensus is that economic growth is achievable only when governments adopt economic policies that enable the private sector to become the main driver of growth. Yesterday, I participated in a panel organized by the Arab Business Council. The Council leads the Forum for the Future's business dialogue with ministers, and the business leaders know better than any of us about the challenges and immense opportunities - of doing business in the region.

I am proud to say that, through the Forum for the Future, we have already taken the first steps in implementing this vision:

 

The International Finance Corporation (IFC) launchedits facility for technical assistance to support small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in the BMENA region in September 2004. Activities are underway to train SME managers, develop financial institutions and markets, and promote an enabling environment for businesses. For example, the IFC is expanding its SME management training toYemen, holding a regional conference on SME lending practices, and negotiating with several banks in the region on specific SME lending training packages. Donors have pledged more than $43 million to the facility, in addition to the IFC's own $20 million bringing the total level of financing to about $63 million thus far.

 

The creation of a Network of Funds was agreed to facilitate greater cooperation among regional and international development institutions to improve the effectiveness of official financing in the region. Building on existing mechanisms, the Network of Funds will serve also as an advisory group for G8 and BMENA governments. The Arab Monetary Fund will convene the first meeting of Network institutions this year to discuss and develop its initiatives.

 

Jordanhas taken lead in working with the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) to establish a regional microfinance technical hub and training center to build capacity and introduce best practices.Yemen has committed to launch its own microfinance pilot project. TheU.S.plans to contribute $125 million to microenterprise in the BMENA region over the next 5 years, to further the G8 goal of reaching 2 million entrepreneurs.

 

Under theUK's chairmanship of the G8, work has already begun with the World Bank on identifying the specific impediments to growth and investment in the BMENA region.

We recognize that the G8-BMENA channel does not operate on its own. We can learn from and build on experiences of the European Commission with the Barcelona Process, Euro-Mediterranean partnerships, and the European Neighborhood policies. We are also impressed to hear about a European Central Bank meeting with governors of central banks from region.

TheUnited Statesapplauds and provides support to countries in the region that are making good progress on reform. A few examples of market-oriented measures that are removing barriers to growth include:

InEgypt, Minister Boutros-Ghali and his colleagues have made significant strides in recent months by reducing tariff rates, introducing legislation that would slash personal and corporate income tax rates, and increasing exchange rate flexibility exactly the kinds of policies needed to attract foreign investors and boost growth. And markets have taken notice Egyptian equities are up 100% in the last year while the Egyptian pound has appreciated by more than 5 percent against the dollar and the euro in the last month.

 

InMorocco, the government's commitment to the privatization of state-owned enterprises, its efforts to increase the transparency of government decision-making, and the liberalization of its trade policy are all visible indicators of a realization that the private sector not the government must be the main engine of economic growth.The U.S.-Morocco Free Trade Agreement andMorocco's eligibility for funding from the Millennium Challenge Account are two tangible indicators of our support forMorocco's reform-oriented policies.

 

InWest BankandGaza, we have seenremarkable progress in the government's financial accountability. Under the leadership of Finance Minister Fayaad, the transparency of the budget process has improved dramatically, through measures such a direct deposit system under which funds are disbursed directly to employees. Minister Fayaad has also brought the petroleum monopoly under the Finance Ministry's direct control.  With the democratic election of President Abbas and continued urgency for peace in the region, the United Statessupports further economic measures to reduce poverty and unemployment.

InPakistan, where just 5 years ago the country was on the brink of default, the country now successfully taps international capital markets.The country's success has been a direct result of the government's economic policies, leading to its fastest growth rate in almost 10 years (6.4%).Pakistanhas liberalized its trade regime substantially, reducing tariffs and removing most nontariff barriers. It has also privatized and restructured its banking sector significantly:80% of banking assets are now in the private sector (up from 34% in 1999, and just 8% in 1990) and non-performing loans have fallen to 13.8% (down from 23% in 2001).

 

InBahrain, a Free Trade Agreement was signed with the United Statesin September 2004, where the government agreed to 100% duty free trade of consumer and industrial goods and a phase-out of tariffs on remaining products.  The agreement is just one example of strongU.S.support forBahrain's continued progress on trade liberalization and economic reform.

InJordan, Finance Minister Abu Hammour has made great strides in implementing fiscal policies reducing expenditures, increasing revenues that have brought down the ratio of public debt to GDP by nearly 8 percentage points in 2004, and progress has been made in structural reforms, including in privatizing the management of the Aqaba container port.

 

A little over a week ago, I had the privilege of witnessing President Bush's swearing in ceremony. In his inaugural address, he stressed one unifying theme: freedom. In these remarks I have stressed the importance of economic freedom through economic reform. Last month inRabatat the first Forum for the Future meeting, Secretary Colin Powell emphasized that "Political freedom and economic freedom go hand in hand." These links are clearly visible in the Broader Middle East andNorth Africa. As President Bush said, "Our goal . . . is to help others find their own voice, attain their own freedom, and make their own way."* *We look forward to supporting and working with the people of region on their priorities for economic growth, job creation and poverty reduction, while recognizing that only through local ownership can the people's aspirations for economic opportunity and sustained growth be realized.
