---
title: Treasury Secretary Lauds Choice of Paul Wolfowitz to Lead World Bank
date: 2005-03-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2320
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-2320

Treasury Secretary John Snow today praised the President's nomination of Paul Wolfowitz to be the next World Bank President. The tremendously important mission of the World Bank demands that it be led by an outstanding person; someone with proven leadership skills, management experience in large organizations, international diplomatic experience, real vision, a commitment and passion for development, and the knowledge of how to make it happen. Paul Wolfowitz meets and exceeds each and all of these criteria. He is a highly qualified candidate for this post, which is one of great magnitude and far-reaching consequences. I am proud to join the President in advancing this recommendation.

As the leading international institution charged with reducing poverty, the World Bank's purpose is noble and unique. It represents the hope of impoverished people across the globe. In considering candidates for this position, we consulted extensively with the Bank's Executive Board and Development Committee to come to a consensus on the essential qualifications of a World Bank leader as well as the timing of this selection. We wanted to find a person with the ability to build on Jim Wolfensohn's outstanding leadership and invaluable contributions. Mr. Wolfensohn has been a faithful, ardent and inspiring World Bank President; he is a tough act to follow, but I believe we have found the man who can do so and continue Jim's distinguished record of accomplishment.

The timing of this nomination will also allow for a smooth transition, well in advance of the Spring Meetings of the World Bank andInternationalMonetary Fund (IMF)

We evaluated many exceptional candidates and have recommended an individual that more than meets the standards of excellence for this position. Paul Wolfowitz is a proven leader, manager and diplomat. He is the right man for the job, and the World Bank will benefit from his unique set of skills and great passion for the Bank's cause.
