---
title: Iannicola Participates in Financial Education Roundtable in London
date: 2005-11-15
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js3015
---
*(Archived Content)*

js-3015

Treasury's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. participated in the International Comparisons of Financial Education Roundtable Discussion today in London. Iannicola gave a presentation on American financial education followed by an open discussion on international comparisons of financial literacy.

The event was hosted by the Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD) in conjunction with the Smith Institute, an independent think tank. In addition to the roundtable, the OECD launched a report entitled, Improving Financial Literacy: Principles, Programs, and Good Practices. This report provides international guidance to improve financial education. It also highlights the importance of financial education, in terms of helping individuals budget and manage their incomes, save and invest efficiently and avoid becoming victims of fraud.

Around the world free markets allow people to set their own courses for the future.  Financial knowledge can help individuals navigate their way to better lives for themselves and their families regardless of where they live, said Iannicola. Today, representatives from some of the world's major economies have gathered here in London to discuss what our nations have done and what we have learned as we each seek to help our own country's people by enhancing their financial literacy.  The exchange of experiences and ideas will benefit all of us.

The Department of the Treasury is a leader in promoting financial education.  Treasury established the office of Financial Education in May of 2002. The office works to promote access to the financial education tools that can help all Americans make wiser choices in all areas of personal financial management, with a special emphasis on saving, credit management, homeownership and retirement planning.  The office also coordinates the efforts of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, a group chaired by the Secretary of Treasury and composed of representatives from 20 federal departments, agencies and commissions, which works to improve financial literacy and education for people throughout the United States.  For more information about the office of Financial Education visit:[www.treas.gov/financialeducation](https://home.treasury.gov/about/organizational-structure/offices/Pages/--Office-of-Financial-Education-and-Financial-Access.aspx).
