---
title: U.S. Treasurer to Discuss Strengthening Social Security and Financial Education in San Antonio
date: 2005-08-05
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2679
---
*(Archived Content)*

U.S. Treasurer Anna Escobedo Cabral will be in San Antonio next week to hold a roundtable discussion with members of the San Antonio business community on President Bush's efforts to strengthen and preserve Social Security.

Next week marks the 70th anniversary of the creation of Social Security, one of the great successes of 20th century American government. Since President Roosevelt founded the program in 1935, Social Security has reduced poverty among the elderly and provided retirement security to millions of American families.

Social Security's 70th anniversary reminds us not only of how far we have come, but also that we have the opportunity and obligation to strengthen the system for our children and grandchildren, said Treasurer Cabral. Refusing to offer solutions is not an option. Social Security is too important not to act. The future of our children and grandchildren depends on it.

While in San Antonio, the Treasurer will also participate in a Girl Scout forum on the importance of saving. Cabral will teach a lesson from the Girl Scouts CentsAbility financial education program which educates Scouts on managing money, investment options, career choices, and financial lifestyles.

The following events are open to the media:

- **WHAT**Roundtable Discussion on the 70th Anniversary of Social Security hosted by The Greater San Antonio Chamber of Commerce and The San Antonio Hispanic Chamber of Commerce Media availability will follow roundtable
- **WHEN**Tuesday, August 99:30 - 10:30 a.m. CDT
- **WHERE**The Greater ChamberThe McDermott Briefing Center602 E. Commerce StreetSan Antonio, Texas

- **WHAT**Girl Scouts CentsAbility Financial Education Program
- **WHEN**Tuesday, August 91:00 p.m. EDT
- **WHERE**The AvenidaGuadalupe Street, Suite 102San Antonio, TX
 
- **Treasurer Cabral's bio:**http://www.treasury.gov/organization/bios/cabral-e.html
- **History of the Treasurer's Office:**[http://www.treasury.gov/about/history/Pages/default.aspx](about/history)

- 30 -
