---
title: "Snow to Visit Brazil to Promote Economic Growth"
date: 2005-08-01T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js2666
---

Secretary U.S. Treasury Secretary John W. Snow will be in Brazil next week to meet with government officials and representatives of the business and banking communities. Secretary Snow will take the opportunity to highlight the progress Brazil's economy has made in recent years.  The visit will include a meeting of the U.S.-Brazil Group for Growth.  This forum between the U.S. Treasury and Brazil economic officials was created at the direction of President Bush and Brazil President Lula in order for both countries to promote economic strategies that will spur economic growth.

Secretary Snow will be in Brasilia Monday to meet with President Lula, Central Bank President Henrique Meirelles, and Finance Minister Antonio Palocci. On Tuesday, the Secretary will join Minister Palocci at a breakfast meeting with local business leaders in Rio de Janeiro and deliver remarks at a forum sponsored by the Council of Foreign Relations. The Secretary will also join Minister Palocci at the Group for Growth luncheon. On Wednesday the Secretary will travel to the State of Espirito Santo to visit a port in Vitoria, attend a luncheon hosted by Governor Paulo Hartung, and take a tour of the Favela Project hosted by the Inter-American Development Bank.

The following events are open to credentialed media with photo identification:

MONDAY, AUGUST 1

Photo Opportunity at Start of Meeting with Finance Minister Antonio Palocci

2:30 p.m.

Ministerio da Fazenda, Brasília

Photo Opportunity at Start of Meeting with President Luis Inacio Lula da Silva

5:00 p.m.

Palacio do Planalto, Brasília

TUESDAY, AUGUST 2

Council of Foreign Relations Speech

11:00 a.m.

National Confederation of Commerce

General 9th Floor

Justo 307

Rio de Janeiro

Joint Press Conference with Minister Palocci Following Group for Growth Meeting

2:45 p.m.

Meridien Hotel

Elysee Room A & B, 2nd Floor

Rio de Janeiro

Additional media availabilities will be offered during the visit to Vitoria. For details, please contact John Wilcock, Assistant Information Officer/Adido de Imprensa Adjunto, (55) 61- 3312-7353.
