---
title: Statement by Secretary John W. Snow on the Nomination of Eric Solomon to be Treasurys Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy
date: 2006-05-09
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js4245
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free AdobeAcrobatReader. *

JS-4245

 

The President's nomination of Eric Solomon to be Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy is indeed welcome news for taxpayers everywhere. For over 5 years, Eric has played a crucial role in the design and implementation of the President's pro-growth tax relief policies for workers, families, and businesses. That good work has directly contributed to a thriving, robust economy.

In his current role as Deputy Assistant Secretary, Eric has proven himself to have a sharp mind for all aspects of tax policy. As evidenced by the pro-taxpayer approach taken to such key initiatives as Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003, Eric has shown a keen ability to relate those policies to the modern economic environment in which we live.

Eric would bring extensive private-sector experience to this post, as well as insights garnered at the Internal Revenue Service. Eric's significant and varied experience, combined with his passion for protecting the rights of taxpayers makes him uniquely qualified for this important position.

I look forward to the Senate's confirmation of a man I'm honored to have as a colleague.

 

**REPORTS**

- [Fact Sheet](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/factsheetericsolomon.pdf)
