---
title: Treasury Names Three Deputy Assistant Secretaries
date: 2006-06-29
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js4343
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-4343

 

Treasury has named Robert Dohner Deputy Assistant Secretary for Asia, International Affairs; Nova Daly Deputy Assistant Secretary for Investment Security, International Affairs; and Mark Warren Deputy Assistant Secretary for Tax and Budget, Legislative Affairs.

In his position Dohner is responsible for helping shape Treasury policy on regional and country-specific economic issues in Asia. He was formerly the Director of the East Asia Office, responsible for China, Japan, and other economies of East and Southeast Asia. Prior Treasury positions include Tokyo Financial Attachand Director of the Office of Central and Eastern Europe. Before joining Treasury, Dohner was a Senior Economist at the President's Council of Economic Advisers, a Principal Economist at the OECD, and Senior Economic Adviser to Under Secretary of State for Economic and Agricultural Affairs Robert Zoellick during the first Bush Administration. He also taught economics at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University, and he has worked at the GATT and the Monetary Authority of Singapore. Dohner has a Ph.D. in economics from M.I.T.

 

As the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Investment Security, Daly will oversee the staff office responsible for managing the Department's work as the chair of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States. Most recently, Daly served under the National Security Council as the Director for International Trade where he handled multiple trade and investment policy issues including investment security and CFIUS matters. Prior to the NSC, Daly was the Senior Advisor for Trade Policy for Commerce Secretary Donald Evans and had worked for the Senate Finance Committee on trade and investment issues. He holds an undergraduate degree in political science from the University of California, Irvine and a graduate degree in international law and organizations from American University.

Warren is responsible for coordinating with Congress on tax, pension, Social Security and budget issues. Warren started his career on Capitol Hill in 1995 with the House Committee on Small Business and moved to the Senate in 1997 where he served as the Senate Small Business Committee's Chief Tax and Finance Counsel and later as the Staff Director and Chief Counsel. Most recently, he served as the Chief Counsel of the Senate Republican Policy Committee from February 2004 through June 2006. He holds an undergraduate degree in finance and a law degree from Georgetown University, and a Masters Degree in tax law from New York University. Warren has also spent time in private practice working in New York and Washington, DC.
