---
title: Treasury Designates Individual Supporting Al Qaida, Other Terrorist Organizations
date: 2006-12-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp206
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-206



The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated Mohammed Al Ghabra, a naturalized British citizen who provides material and logistical support to al Qaida and other terrorist organizations.



Mohammed Al Ghabra has backed al Qaida and other violent jihadist groups, facilitating travel for recruits seeking to meet with al Qaida leaders and take part in terrorist training, said Adam Szubin, Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC).  We must act against those who fund and facilitate al Qaida's agenda of violence against innocents.



Al Ghabra has organized travel to Pakistan for individuals seeking to meet with senior al Qaida individuals and to undertake jihad training.  Several of these individuals have returned to the UK to engage in covert activity on behalf of al Qaida.  Additionally, Al Ghabra has provided material support and facilitated the travel of UK-based individuals to Iraq to support the insurgents fight against coalition forces.



In addition, Al Ghabra has also provided material and logistical support to other terrorist organizations based in Pakistan, such as Harakat ul-Jihad-I-Islami (HUJI).  While in Pakistan, Al Ghabra met with Haroon Rachid Aswat, who is currently detained in the U.K. and subject to a U.S. extradition request on terrorism charges.



Apart from the financial and logistical support activities that led to his designation, Al Ghabra maintains contact with a significant number of terrorists, including senior al Qaida officials in Pakistan.  In 2002, Al Ghabra met with and stayed at the home of Faraj Al-Libi, who, until he was detained by Pakistani authorities in 2005, served as al Qaida's Director of Operations.  Al Ghabra is also in regular contact with UK-based Islamist extremists and has been involved in the radicalizing of individuals in the UK through the distribution of extremist media.



Al Ghabra also has strong links to the Kashmiri militant group Harakat Ul-Mujahidin (HuM), which has been designated a terrorist organization by the United Nations.  Information shows that Al Ghabra himself has undertaken jihadi training at a HuM training camp in Kashmir.  Al Ghabra intended to fight in Kashmir but was prevented from doing so by HuM as they needed individuals to return to the UK to raise funds.



Identifier InformationMohammed Al GhabraDOB:                              June 1, 1980POB:                               Damascus, SyriaNationality:                     BritishU.K. Passport:               094629366Address:                         East LondonUnited Kingdom (UK)

  

Mohammed Al Ghabra was designated today pursuant to Executive Order 13224, which is aimed at financially isolating terrorists, terrorist facilitators, and financiers.  This designation freezes any assets Al Ghabra may have under U.S. jurisdiction and prohibits all financial and commercial transactions by any U.S. person and Al Ghabra.



- 30 -
