---
title: U.S. Treasurer Visits Denver to Discuss Financial Education, American Competitiveness and the U.S. Economy
date: 2006-03-01
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js4080
---
*(Archived Content)*



js-4080



U.S. Treasurer Anna Escobedo Cabral today delivered remarks to more than 3000 Head Start staff, teachers and parents at The 2ndNational Head Start Hispanic Institute inDenver, Colorado.



Treasurer Cabral thanked the participants for their commitment to improving education and highlighted several Treasury financial education efforts, as well as the Administration's focus on improvingU.S. competitiveness and bolstering policies that are helping the American economy grow and expand.



It is never too early to begin preparing our children for the opportunities of tomorrow.  I applaud your efforts to improve early childhood education in all communities across the country, said Cabral.  President Bush has made improving education and financial savvy a priority, through programs like No Child Left Behind and federal financial education efforts like that of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission, headed by the Department of the Treasury, she continued.



As the global economy changes, America will need skilled workers to fill the jobs of the 21stcentury, and individuals will require the knowledge base to better plan for a secure financial future, she continued.  Improving education at every level, and advancing sound economic policies, such as making tax cuts permanent, will help us succeed in this front.  Additionally, these efforts will together promote American competitiveness in the global marketplace, spurring the kind of job creation at home we've seen this past year 4.7 million new jobs since May of 2003, with 2 million in the last year alone.And, as I look out at this room, I am heartened by the fact that each and every one of you continues to advance the cause of improving our youth's future opportunities for achieving success.



The National Head Start Hispanic Institute provides an opportunity for the leadership and staff of Head start programs to explore specific issues related to providing effective services to Hispanic children and families.



**- 30 - **
