---
title: Treasury Designates Canadian and Sudanese National for Support to al Qaida
date: 2006-07-20T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp22
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-22

The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated Abu Sufian Al-Salamabi Muhammed Ahmed `Abd Al-Razziq, a Canadian and Sudanese citizen, for his high-level ties to and support for the al Qaida network.  Today's action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 13224, which is aimed at prohibiting transactions with terrorists and their supporters and freezing their assets.

Treasury continues to take action against al Qaida and its support network, said Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Daniel Glaser. Abd al-Razziq has been closely tied to senior al Qaida leadership. We are taking steps to inhibit his ability to harm the United States and our allies.

`Abd Al-Razziq has provided administrative and logistical support to al Qaida, and has been identified as being close to Abu Zubayda, a former lieutenant of Usama bin Ladin, involved in al Qaida recruitment and training.

Today's designation of `Abd Al-Razziq, carried out by the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), was executed under Executive Order 13224, an authority that targets the assets of terrorists and their financiers.  Al Qaida was designated a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) pursuant to Executive Order 13224 on September 23, 2001.

**IDENTIFIER INFORMATION Abu Sufian Al-Salamabi Muhammed Ahmed `Abd Al-Razziq ** AKA:                           Abousofian Abdelrazik

AKA:                           Abousofian Abdelrazek

AKA:                           Sofian Abdelrazik

AKA:                           Abousofiane Abdelrazik

AKA:                           Abousfian Salman Abdelrazik

AKA:                           Abu Sufian Abd Al Razeq

AKA:                           Abu Sufian

AKA:                           Abu Juiriah

AKA:                           Abou El Layth

AKA:                           Aboulail

AKA:                           Abulail

AKA:                           Jolaiba

AKA:                           Djolaiba the Sudanese

AKA:                           Ould El Sayeigh

DOB:                           6 August 1962

POB:                            Al-Bawgah, Sudan

ALT POB:                   Albaouga, Sudan

Nationality 1:                Sudanese

Nationality 2:                Canadian

Passport:                      Canada BC166787

According to information available to the United States Government, `Abd Al-Razziq has provided administrative and logistical support to al Qaida.  He has been identified as being close to Abu Zubayda, a former high-ranking member of the al Qaida network, involved in recruitment and training.  `Abd Al-Razziq is known to have been a member of an extremist cell in Montreal, Canada. He was also closely associated with Ahmed Ressam, who attempted to attack the Los Angeles International Airport in conjunction with the Millennium celebrations in January 2000.

 

- 30 -
