---
title: Treasury Department Hosts Radio Day on the Economy Secretary Snow Welcomes Hosts, Administration Officials to Historic Cash Room
date: 2006-01-20T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js3082
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-3082

**WASHINGTON, DC** The U.S. Department of the Treasury today is hosting a Radio Day focusing on the state of the American economy. From 7 a.m. until 7 p.m., radio hosts will broadcast from the Treasury's historic Cash Room, and call-in to radio shows across the nation. More than 20 senior Administration officials will visit throughout the day to talk about economic growth and job creation, including in-depth analyses of leading economic indicators and a look at the work government can do to keep the economy on a strong growth path.

The American economy is truly the envy of the world, and its strength comes from our small-business owners and entrepreneurs, our outstanding workforce and the simple fact that we operate as a free market, Secretary John Snow said. Our role is to create an environment in which workers and businesses can either thrive or struggle. Right now, jobs are being created and the economy is thriving, and we want to make sure that path of growth continues. That means making sure that the right policies are in place especially low marginal tax rates, he went on. I'm very pleased that we are able to have this important discussion about the economy here at the Treasury, in the historic Cash Room. Ongoing conversations about the health of the economy are central to maintaining that health.

Stations and hosts participating in Economic Radio Day include CBS Market Watch, Radio Bilingue/Latino USA, Bloomberg Radio, Kirby Wilbur from KVI in Seattle, Washington, and Sean Hannity from ABC.

Administration officials participating in Treasury's Radio Day:

- Secretary John Snow Department of the Treasury
- Deputy Secretary Robert Kimmitt Department of the Treasury
- U.S. Treasurer Anna Cabral Department of the Treasury
- Assistant Secretary Emil Henry, Jr. Department of Treasury
- Assistant Secretary Mark Warshawsky Department of the Treasury
- Under Secretary Randy Quarles Department of the Treasury
- Secretary Carlos Gutierrez Department of Commerce
- Deputy Secretary David Sampson Department of Commerce
- Secretary Elaine Chao Department of Labor
- Deputy Secretary Steven Law Department of Labor
- Secretary Alphonso Jackson Department of Housing and Urban Development
- Ambassador Rob Portman U.S. Trade Representative
- Karl Rove Assistant to the President, Deputy Chief of Staff and Senior Advisor
- Dan Bartlett Counselor to the President
- Nicolle Wallace White House Communications Director
- Josh Bolten Director of the Office of Management and Budget
- Al Hubbard Assistant to the President for Economic Policy and Director of the National Economic Council
- Keith Hennessey Deputy Director of the National Economic Council
- Ruben Barrales - Director, White House Office of Intergovernmental Affairs

###
