---
title: Treasury Secretary Promotes Energy-Efficient Home Construction
date: 2006-02-22T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js4062
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free AdobeAcrobatReader. *

JS-4062

**Torrington, Conn**. Treasury Secretary John W. Snow visited T&M Building Company in Torrington, Conn. this morning to discuss the availability of new tax credits for homebuilders that construct energy-efficient homes and homeowners who improve the energy efficiency of their existing homes.

Improving the energy-efficiency of new homes and increasing the energy-efficiency of existing homes are both highly effective ways of reducing our national energy consumption, which is a priority that the President set forth in his State of the Union Address this year, Snow said. Guidance for two new tax credits, issued yesterday by the IRS, will provide incentive and reward for these energy-saving efforts.

The tax credits described by Snow are part of the Energy Policy Act signed by President Bush last summer. Snow pointed out that Homes and homeowners who qualify for these credits will showcase a win-win scenario where precious energy is conserved while families also save money on heating and cooling bills both goals of the President's Energy Policy Act of 2005.

After touring the T&M facilities, Snow spoke to company managers and employees. I applaud the owners and employees of T&M for the contributions they have made by building homes in over 40 Connecticut communities, and I encourage them and builders all over the country to continue with efforts to make new homes more energy-efficient. As the President has said, the power of technology and the innovative spirit of America through both energy production and efficiency will reduce our reliance on foreign sources of energy, which will help ensure a growing and prosperous America in the 21st Century, Snow continued. There can be no question that energy savings should start at home and that's what these tax credits are all about.

**Homebuilder Credit Guidance**

- **Timing:** Credits available in 2006 and 2007.
- **Who Qualifies & How Much**:

- **IRS Guidance:  Homeowner Credit Guidance**

- **Tim ing: Credits can be claimed in 2006 or 2007.**
- **Who/What Qualifies & How Much:**
- Homeowners may claim up to $500 in credits over the two-year period.Energy-efficient improvements to the building envelope qualify for a 10 percent credit, e.g. insulation, exterior windows and doors (including storm windows and doors), and metal roofs (International Energy Conservation Code or the Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star program standards may apply).Certain heating and cooling equipment that meets the energy-efficiency standards specified in the Internal Revenue Code.
- **IRS Guidance**:Establishes a process that manufacturers can use to certify their product(s) qualifies for the credit.Affords certainty to homeowners, who will be permitted to rely on the manufacturer's certification when claiming the credit on their returns.**Relating IRS News Releases:**

Treasury and IRS Provide Guidance for energy Credits for HomeownersIR-2006-34, Feb. 21, 2006 -- Homeowners can rely on certifications from manufacturers of energy efficient items to claim tax credits.

**Treasury and IRS Issue Guidance for Coal Project Credit and Gasification Project Credit **IR-2006-33, Feb. 2 2006 -- Companies are provided guidance for engaging in getting tax credit for Coal Project Program and Gasification Project Program.** Treasury and IRS Provide Guidance on Energy Credit To Home Builders **IR-2006-32, Feb 21, 2006 -- Homebuilders may be eligible for up to $2,000 for credits related to building homes that are more energy efficient.** IRS Has $2 Billion for People Who Have Not Filed a 2002 Tax Return **IR-2006-31, Feb. 21, 2006 -- The deadline for filing a 2002 income tax return to claim a refund for that year is April 17, 2006.** REPORTS**

- [Energy Guidance Homeown](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/energy-guidance-homeown.pdf)
- [Energy Guidance Homebuild 1](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/energy-guidance-homebuild-1.pdf)
- [Energy Guidance Homebuild 2](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/energy-guidance-homebuild-2.pdf)
