---
title: Treasury Designations Target Terrorist Facilitators
date: 2006-12-07T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp191
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-191

The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated five individuals for providing financial support to al Qaida and other terrorist organizations, as well as facilitating terrorist activity. The individuals were designated pursuant to Executive Order 13224 and added to the Treasury's list of Specially Designated Global Terrorists.

These individuals support every stage of the terrorist life-cycle, from financing terrorist groups and activity, to facilitating deadly attacks, and inciting others to join campaigns of violence and hate.  The civilized world must stand united in isolating these terrorists, said Stuart Levey, Treasury's Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.

This designation freezes any assets the designees may have under U.S. jurisdiction and prohibits all financial and commercial transactions by any U.S. person with the designees. In addition, in accordance with U.N. Security Council Resolution 1624, the U.S. Government condemns those who incite others to acts of terrorism and violence.

**Identifying Information Najmuddin Faraj Ahmad**Name: Najmuddin Faraj Ahmad

AKAs: Mullah KrekarFateh Najm Eddine FarrajFaraj Ahmad Najmuddin

DOB: 7 JULY 1956Alt. DOB: 17 JUNE 1963POB: Olaqloo Sharbajer Village, Al-Sulaymaniyah Governorate, IraqCitizenship: IraqAddress: Heimdalsgate 36-V, 0578 Oslo, Norway

**Krekar Provides Support to Ansar al-Sunnah**Najmuddin Faraj Ahmad, a.k.a. Mullah Krekar (Krekar), founded in December 2001 the Kurdish terrorist group Ansar al-Islam (AI), now known as Ansar al-Sunnah (AS), and served as AI's first leader.

As of spring 2005, a non-governmental organization founded by Krekar sent money to terrorist organizations and actively recruited European citizens into terrorist organizations. Branches of the NGO were, as of spring 2005, overtly and covertly gathering money and recruiting personnel for AS. Krekar has visited Germany several times and during these trips conducted fundraising for AS and performed logistical activities. Information shows that in January 2006, Krekar may have routed funds through associates in Bulgaria and Iraq to support AS in Iraq.

As of fall 2005, AS reportedly had established at least two sniper teams in Iraq; the founder of these teams claimed to be Krekar's representative in Iraq. Krekar also traveled regularly from Norway to the Iraqi Kurdish area. During one of his longer stays in northern Iraq, Krekar appears to have recruited and trained combatants.

**Other Information**Apart from the instances of direct facilitation of terrorist groups which form the basis for his designation, Krekar has exhorted others to violence and supplied religious justifications for murder. In a 2004 interview, Krekar supported holy war in Iraq and identified legitimate targets, stating Not just the officers, but also the civilians who help the Americans. If anyone so much as fetches them a glass of water, he can be killed. ... Everyone is a target. If an aid organization gives the Americans as much as a glass of water, they will become a target.**Hamid Al-Ali**Name: Hamid Al-AliAKAs: Dr. Hamed Abdullah Al-AliHamed Al-`AliHamed bin `Abdallah Al-`AliHamid bin Abdallah Ahmed Al-AliHamid `Abdallah Ahmad Al-`AliAbu SalimHamid `Abdallah Al-`Ali

DOB: 20 JANUARY 1960Citizenship: Kuwait

Hamid Al-Ali is a Kuwait-based terrorist facilitator who has provided financial support for al Qaida-affiliated groups seeking to commit acts of terrorism in Kuwait, Iraq, and elsewhere.

**Al-Ali Provides Support for al Qaida in Iraq**Evidence shows that Al-Ali's efforts include providing support for terrorist organizations, including those in Iraq. Along with Jaber Al-Jalamah and Mubarak Mushakhas Sanad Al-Bathali, also designated today, Al-Ali recruits jihadists in Kuwait for terrorist activity including for al Qaida in Iraq. Al-Ali has provided financial support for recruits, including paying for their travel expenses to Iraq.**Al-Ali Provides Funds for al Qaida-Associated Terrorist Cells in Kuwait**Al-Ali was a religious leader and financier for a Kuwait-based terrorist cell that plotted to attack U.S. and Kuwaiti targets in early 2005. The al Qaida-associated terrorist cell appears to have been under his supervision. Al-Ali reportedly visited the group's terrorist camps in Kuwait, providing funds supporting acts of terrorism.

In addition to financial support and recruiting services, Al-Ali also provided opportunities for potential recruits to obtain explosives training in 2004. He also used his website to provide technical advice for making explosives, chemical, and biological weapons.

**Other Information**Separate from the financial and other services in support of terrorist groups for which Al-Ali is being designated, he has issued fatwas legitimizing suicide operations. One such fatwa sanctions the permissiveness, and sometimes necessity, of suicide operations, on the condition of crushing the enemy ... or causing moral defeat to the enemy, to obtain victory. According to this fatwa, in modern time(s) this can be accomplished through the modern means of bombing, or by bringing down an airplane on an important site that causes the enemy great casualties.**Jaber Al-Jalamah**Name: Jaber Al-JalamahAKAs: Jabir `Abdallah Jabir Ahmad Al-JalamahJabir Abdallah Jabir Ahmad JalahmahJaber Al-JalahmaAbu Muhammad Al-JalahmahAbu MuhammadJabir Al-Jalhami`Abdul-Ghani

DOB: 24 SEPTEMBER 1959Nationality: KuwaitiPassport #: 101423404

Jaber Al-Jalamah is a Kuwait-based terrorist facilitator who has provided financial and logistical support to the al Qaida network in Afghanistan, Iraq and Kuwait. Al-Jalamah has also provided recruits for these efforts.

**Al-Jalamah Recruits and Provides Financial Support for al Qaida in Iraq**As of 2006, Al-Jalamah supports activities and operations against coalition forces in Iraq. As early as 2004, Al-Jalamah was coordinating a recruitment effort to send fighters and funds to al Qaida in Iraq. He facilitated travel for men he recruited and for men recruited by Kuwaiti imams. Al-Jalamah sent three kinds of people into Iraq: suicide bombers, anti-coalition fighters, and couriers who go to Iraq to provide funds for anti-coalition fighters.

Al-Jalamah has sent a significant number of men to join al Qaida in Iraq. These operatives carried funds collected by Al-Jalamah for provision to the terrorist group. Trusted associates were sometimes given thousands of dollars to transport from Kuwait into Iraq.

**Al-Jalamah Provides Support for al Qaida Associates in Kuwait, Afghanistan and Pakistan**As of 2004, Al-Jalamah was considered the leader of a group of terrorists in Kuwait, some of whom he recruited for activity in Afghanistan. Al-Jalamah collected and funneled money to al Qaida-associated individuals in Kuwait, providing thousands of Kuwaiti dinars to al Qaida-associated operatives on a regular basis, including to Muhsin al-Fadhli. Al-Fadhli is listed at the UN 1267 Sanctions Committee.

Soon after September 11, 2001, Al-Jalamah sent supplies to Afghanistan for use by trainees. In mid-2001, Al-Jalamah sent a Kuwaiti individual to Afghanistan where he attended the al Qaida-associated al-Faruq training camp. Al-Jalamah gave the Kuwaiti money to transfer to al Qaida. Al-Jalamah also sent recruits and supplies to al Qaida camps in Afghanistan. In the late 1990s/early 2000s, Al-Jalamah also visited the al-Faruq training camp, supplying global-positioning systems, laptop computers, and a video camera.

Al-Jalamah's role with al Qaida includes dealing personally with Usama bin Laden. Al-Jalamah went to Afghanistan three times in the late 1990s/early 2000s to provide bin Laden large sums of money. During a 2001 meeting, bin Laden agreed to set up a training camp especially for Kuwaitis in Afghanistan. This plan was reportedly never put into action.

**Al-Jalamah Provided Support for an Attack against Americans**Al-Jalamah was involved in the planning of the January 21, 2003, al Qaida-linked terrorist attack on two U.S. civilian contractors in Kuwait. He provided support and assistance to one of the perpetrators.**Mubarak Mushakhas Sanad Al-Bathali**Name: Mubarak Mushakhas Sanad Al-BathaliAKAs: Mubarak Al-BathaliMubarak Mishkhis Sanad Al-BathaliMubarak Mishkhas Sanad Al-BathaliMubarak Mishkhis Sanad Al-BadhaliMubarak Mishkhas Sanad Al-BazaliMobarak Meshkhas Sanad Al-Bthaly

DOB: 1 OCTOBER 1961Passport: 101856740 KuwaitCitizenship: Kuwait

Mubarak Mushakhas Sanad Al-Bathali is a Kuwait-based terrorist facilitator. He also serves as a fundraiser and recruiter for the al Qaida network. Al-Bathali has spoken at several mosques in Kuwait to raise funds for provision to al Qaida operatives. As of 2006, Al-Bathali continues to facilitate travel for extremists planning to fight in Iraq and Afghanistan.

**Al Bathali Provides Support to the al Qaida Network**Al-Bathali has raised funds in Kuwait for terrorist organizations for years. In 2004, Al-Bathali gathered several hundred Kuwaiti dinars each week for terrorist organizations, including al Qaida, Ansar al-Islam and Lashkar E-Tayyiba. In 2003 and 2004, Al-Bathali provided funds to al Qaida in Iraq through intermediaries. In 2002-2003, Al-Bathali contributed $20,000 to Ansar al-Islam through contacts in Syria. In 2001, Al-Bathali sent a courier to carry approximately $20,000 to an al Qaida finance manager in Pakistan. Prior to this, in 1999, Al-Bathali met with several top al Qaida members and gave them roughly $100,000.**Other Information**In 2002, Al-Bathali traveled to Saudi Arabia to meet with several radical leaders who were involved with al Qaida to discuss jihad and arrange for the transfer of funds to him.

In 2003, Al-Bathali reiterated his objectives of recruiting Muslim youth in the Arabian Gulf, especially in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, to support the fighters in Iraqi Kurdistan. This support was to include collecting donations for Muslim fighters and distributing CDs about Ansar al-Islam.

In January 2003, Al-Bathali and Al-Jalamah met with an individual who was involved in the shooting of two U.S. contractors outside of Camp Doha, Kuwait, and discussed financing his militant training operations.

**Mohamed Moumou**Name: Mohamed MoumouAKAs: Mohamed MumuAbu ShraydaAbu AminaAbu `AbdallahAbou Abderrahman

DOB: 30 JULY 1965Alt. DOB: 30 SEPTEMBER 1965POB: Fez, MoroccoCitizenship: MoroccoCitizenship: SwedenPassport: 9817619, Expires 14 DECEMBER 2009 (Sweden)Address: Storvretsvagen 92, 7 TR. C/O Drioua, 142 31 Skogas, SwedenAddress: Jungfruns Gata 413, Postal Address Box: 3027, 13603 Haninge, SwedenAddress: London, EnglandAddress: Dobelnsgatan 97, 7 TR C/O Lamrabet, 113 52 Stockholm, SwedenAddress: Trodheimsgatan 6, 164 32 Kista, Sweden

Mohamed Moumou's extremist activities date back to the mid-1990's, when he traveled to Afghanistan to participate in the al Qaida-run Khalden terrorist training camp. A Moroccan national with Swedish citizenship, Moumou was the uncontested leader of an extremist group centered around the Brandbergen Mosque in Stockholm, Sweden. Moumou's leadership derives from connections to senior al Qaida leaders, some of whom he had met in Afghanistan and Pakistan in the late-1990s. Moumou reportedly served, at some time in the past, as Abu Mus'ab al-Zarqawi's representative in Europe for issues related to chemical and biological weapons. Moreover, Moumou reportedly maintains ties to al-Zarqawi's inner circle in Iraq.
