---
title: Treasury Announces Market Financing Estimates
date: 2006-07-31
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp35
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free Adobe® Acrobat® Reader®. *



HP-35



Treasury announced its current estimates of net marketable financing for the July - September 2006 and October – December 2006 quarters:


- Over the July – September 2006 quarter, the Treasury expects to borrow $30 billion of net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-September cash balance of $35 billion.  The current estimate is $59 billion lower than announced in May 2006.  Cash outlays are expected to exceed cash receipts by $23 billion this quarter, resulting in a financing need which is $55 billion lower than our previous estimate and is the primary contributor to the decrease in borrowing of net marketable debt this quarter.
- Over the October – December 2006 quarter, the Treasury expects to borrow $104 billion of net marketable debt to meet a projected financing need of $106 billion, assuming an end-of-December cash balance of $25 billion.


During the April – June 2006 quarter, Treasury paid down $92 billion of net marketable debt, ending with a cash balance of $46 billion on June 30.  In May 2006, Treasury announced an estimated pay down in net marketable borrowing of $51 billion, assuming an end-of-June cash balance of $25 billion.  Cash receipts exceeded cash outlays by $137 billion, contributing to a financing need that was $61 billion less than previously assumed.  The pay down in net marketable borrowing over the quarter was $41 billion larger than previously estimated.



Since 1997, the average absolute forecast error in net borrowing of marketable debt for the current quarter is $10 billion and the average absolute forecast error for the end-of-quarter cash balance is $9 billion.  Similarly, the average absolute forecast error for the following quarter is $33 billion and the average absolute forecast error for the end-of-quarter cash balance is $11 billion.



Additional financing details relating to Treasury's Quarterly Refunding will be released at 9:00 A.M. on Wednesday, August 2.



-30-



**REPORTS**


- [Sources and Uses Table](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/hp35_sources_and_uses.pdf)
