---
title: Opening Statement of Robert F. Hoyt Nominee for General Counsel
date: 2006-11-14T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp164
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-164

**Before the Senate Finance Committee Washington, D.C.** –Thank you Mr. Chairman, Senator Baucus and Members of the Committee for the opportunity to appear before you today. I am especially appreciative of your prompt scheduling of this hearing.

I am very honored to be President Bush's nominee to serve as General Counsel of the Department of the Treasury. My period of service in President Bush's White House, and my exposure to his leadership and integrity, have left a deep impression on me. I am also grateful to Secretary Paulson for his confidence in recommending me for this position. If confirmed, I look forward to working with the Secretary in furthering the Administration's economic agenda.

If you will permit me, I'd like to take a moment to introduce the members of my family who are here today, and whose support means so much to me.

Nearly twenty years ago, I decided to build my legal career in Washington. I believe the many professional experiences I have had since then have prepared me well to assume the role of General Counsel.

These experiences include 15 years of private practice with a focus on representing public companies on issues involving government regulation and the capital markets; six years at the top management levels of an international law firm that grew to have more than 1,000 lawyers; and close to a year and a half working in the White House Counsel's Office. More than anything else, these experiences have taught me the value of providing legal advice that reflects the highest levels of integrity, analysis, vision and hard work.

I come to this hearing with a keen understanding that the legal issues facing the Treasury Department today are among the most critical in government. The Department is a key player in the continual strengthening of our national security, in the development and implementation of tax policy, and in maintaining and expanding the most impressive economy in the world. I understand that these areas and many others are of great importance to the Members of this Committee and the Congress as a whole. If confirmed, I undertake to work with you to ensure that the Department receives the best legal advice as it continues in its great tradition of promoting America's economic agenda.

- 30 -
