---
title: Treasury Calls for Large Position Reports
date: 2006-07-05T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js4348
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free AdobeAcrobatReader. *

js-4348

 

The Treasury is calling for Large Position Reports from those entities whose reportable position in the 4-7/8% Treasury Notes of May 2008 equals or exceeds $2 billion as of close of business **Wednesday, June 28, 2006**.  This call for Large Position Reports is a test.  Entities with reportable positions in this note equal to or exceeding this $2 billion threshold must report these positions to the Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York.  Entities with positions in this note below $2 billion are not required to file Large Position Reports. Reports must be received by the Government Securities Dealer Statistical Unit of the Federal Reserve Bank ofNew YorkbeforenoonEastern Time on ** Wednesday, July 12, 2006  ,** and must include the required position and administrative information. Large Position Reports may be faxed to (212) 720-5030 or delivered to the Bank at33 Liberty Street, 4th floor.

### Details on Call for Large Position Reports

** Security Description**

4-7/8% Treasury Notes of May 2008, Series V-2008

** CUSIP Number**

912828 FG 0

** CUSIP Number of STRIPS Principal Component**

912820 ND 5

** Maturity Date ** May 31, 2008 ** Date for Which Information Must Be Reported ** June 28, 2006as of COB ** Large Position Reporting Threshold**

$2 Billion (Par Value)

** Date Report Is Due ** July 12, 2006, beforenoonEastern time

This call for large position information is made under Treasury's large position reporting rules (17 CFR Part 420).  The notice calling for Large Position Reports is also being published in the*Federal Register*.  This press release and a copy of a sample Large Position Report, which appears in Appendix B of the rules at 17 CFR Part 420, are available at the Bureau of the Public Debt's Internet site at[www.publicdebt.treas.gov](http://www.publicdebt.treas.gov).

Questions about Treasury's large position reporting rules should be directed to Treasury's Government Securities Regulations Staff at Public Debt on (202) 504-3632.  Questions regarding the method of submission of Large Position Reports should be directed to the Government Securities Dealer Statistical Unit of the Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York at (212) 720-7993.

- [Background on Calls for Large Positions Reports](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/largepositionbackground_070506.pdf)

**-30-**
