---
title: U.S. Treasurer Cabral speaks to the Executive Women in Government Summit
date: 2006-03-22T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js4131
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-4131

U.S. Treasurer Anna Escobedo Cabral today delivered remarks to the Executive Women in Government's (EWG) annual summit and training conference.

Treasurer Cabral thanked the EWG members present for their continual hard work in their respected fields and spokeon the President's continued efforts to maintain the economy's momentum and ensure thatAmerica remains the leader of the global economy.

Economic opportunity and freedom go hand-in-hand and they are the reasons my family came to this country.  They are reasons that a daughter of financially challenged parents can, today, have her signature on the United States currency.  She can make her parents proud and she can help her own children do well, said Cabral.  That's why it means so much to me, personally, to help the President advance his economic agenda.

I believe that a rising tide lifts all boats, and the performance of our economy over the past three years is proving that theory.  Almost five million net new jobs have been created in the last three years.  That is the best possible news for millions of American families, said Cabral.  Our growth rate is very strong and we anticipate continuing strong economic growth, job creation and wage increases.  The ingredients of our economy, which is the envy of the world, are uniquely American.  They include: an embrace of entrepreneurship, an outstanding workforce, and an open attitude towards trade and investment.
