---
title: Treasury Department Hosts Radio Day on the Economy
date: 2006-01-20
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/200612094465055
---
*(Archived Content)*



2006-1-20-9-4-46-5055



The U.S. Department of the Treasury hosted a Radio Day last Friday which focused on the state of the American economy. Radio hosts broadcast their shows from the Treasury's historic Cash Room throughout the day, and call-in radio shows across the nation heard from more than 20 Administration officials who participated in the event. Topics of discussion included economic growth and job creation, including in-depth analyses of leading economic indicators and a look at the work government can do to keep the economy on a strong growth path.



The American economy is truly the envy of the world, and its strength comes from our small-business owners and entrepreneurs, our outstanding workforce and the simple fact that we operate as a free market, Secretary John Snow said. Our role is to create an environment in which workers and businesses can either thrive or struggle. Right now, jobs are being created and the economy is thriving, and we want to make sure that path of growth continues. That means making sure that the right policies are in place - especially low marginal tax rates, he went on. I'm very pleased that we were able to have this important discussion about the economy here at the Treasury, in the historic Cash Room. Ongoing conversations about the health of the economy are central to maintaining that health.



**LINKS**


- [Treasury Department Hosts Radio Day on the Economy](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/js3082)
###
