---
title: Weinberger Named U.S. Treasury Department
date: 2006-03-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js4122
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-4122

The Treasury Department announced this week that Jonathan R. Weinberger will serve as the Department's Executive Secretary. In this position, Weinberger is responsible for the coordination of Department-wide reviews and analyses of Treasury policy initiatives, regulations, testimony, correspondence, memoranda, reports and briefing materials for the Secretary and Deputy Secretary.

From 2005-2006, Weinberger served as a senior advisor in Treasury's Office of Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes. In this capacity he provided advice and counsel to Department principals and other members of the interagency team that are responsible for the combating of money laundering and terrorist financing. Weinberger also played a vital role with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the premier international body that combats money laundering and terrorist financing. He was closely involved with FATF's evaluation of the United States financial system, and served as the United States' representative on the six-nation inaugural Financial Experts Review Group at the Cape Town, South Africa Winter Plenary. The Experts Review Group acted as arbiters for the FATF mutual evaluations of Ireland and Sweden.

Weinberger served as an Honors Attorney from 2003-2005 in Treasury's Office of the General Counsel. As an attorney, Weinberger worked with the Assistant General Counsel for Litigation, Legislation and Financial Enforcement on a variety of issues. He also worked closely with the General Counsel on various national security issues and other Treasury related activity including coinage, Health Savings Accounts and tax issues among others.

Before coming to the Treasury Department, Weinberger spent several years with the U.S. Department of State. From 2000 to 2003, he served in the Executive Secretariat in the Office of the Secretary of State where he coordinated briefing materials, testimony and other matters. From 1998 to 2000, Weinberger served in the Office of Central American Affairs where he dealt with issues such as the Panama Canal transfer and the rebuilding of several countries after Hurricane Mitch. In 1999, he also served at the U.S. Embassy in Rome where he conducted studies with the U.S. Labor Counselor and delivered speeches, in Italian, to labor union meetings and conferences.

Originally from Scranton, Pennsylvania, Weinberger received his Bachelors Degree in International Affairs and Italian from The Johns Hopkins University in 1998. He also earned a Masters Degree in U.S. Foreign Policy from the Elliott School of International Affairs at George Washington University in 2000, a Juris Doctor degree from the Washington College of Law at American University in 2003, and a Masters of Law (LL.M) in international finance and national security law with distinction from The Georgetown University Law Center in 2005.

