---
title: Treasury Participates In World Financial Literacy Leaders Conference
date: 2006-09-29
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp123
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-123

 

Warsaw, Poland- Treasury Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. visited Warsaw, Poland this week to discuss financial literacy issues with international economic leaders. Iannicola delivered remarks and moderated a panel at a conference hosted by the National Bank of Poland, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the European Central Bank in Warsaw.

More and more countries are recognizing the importance of financial literacy for their citizens.  Free markets and free enterprise are giving people more financial choices, Mr. Iannicola said.  But as our choices increase so must our knowledge, so we can make the right financial decisions for ourselves and our families.

The conference provided a forum for the exchange of experience and ideas from more than 200 recognized central bankers, government officials, academic and international educators.

By meeting with the global leaders in financial education today, we can share our thoughts and all bring back valuable insights to our respective nations, he said.

The Treasury Department is the head of the 20-agency Financial Literacy Commission that recently released the firstU.S. national strategy to improve financial literacy in America.  The plan, titled Taking Ownership of the Future: The National Strategy for Financial Literacy, is available at MyMoney.gov.

