---
title: Statement of Treasury Secretary John W. Snow On FMS Senior Executive Appointments
date: 2006-05-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js4260
---
*(Archived Content)*



JS-4260

  

Treasury Secretary John W. Snow issued the following statement today on his appointments to Treasury's Financial Management Service (FMS).I am pleased to announce my decision to appoint Kenneth R. Papaj to serve as Commissioner of Treasury's FMS and Judith Tillman as the Deputy Commissioner.  I am confident that Mr. Papaj and Ms. Tillman will sustain the direction and high performance of the critically important operations of FMS in carrying out the day-to-day financial management of the federal government.Mr. Papaj has served FMS as Deputy Commissioner since 1998, and prior to that he held senior executive positions at Treasury's Bureau of the Public Debt.  He has more than 32 years of Treasury experience, which began with a federal career at the FMS predecessor organization, the Bureau of Government Financial Operations.Ms. Tillman has worked at Treasury for more than 32 years, splitting her career between the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and FMS. As FMS' Assistant Commissioner for Regional Operations she was responsible for making almost 1 billion federal payments annually from four locations.Their appointments are effective May 30 upon the retirement of current Commissioner Richard L. Gregg.  Commissioner Gregg's decision will conclude 40 years of distinguished service to the federal government and nearly a decade as FMS Commissioner. Treasury is proud that he chose to spend his entire civilian federal service with our Department's Fiscal Service. He is widely recognized both within and outside government as an outstanding leader.I am confident Mr. Papaj and Ms. Tillman will continue the rich legacy of FMS innovation and efficient operations Commissioner Gregg has created.FMS is a bureau of the U.S. Department of the Treasury, primarily responsible for the collection of government revenues, federal payments like social security, veterans' benefits and tax refunds, debt collection and government-wide accounting.  In the past year, FMS issued approximately one billion federal payments to more than 100 million people and collected more than $2.67 trillion of federal revenues.
