---
title: Remarks of Anna Escobedo Cabral U.S. Treasurer, U.S. Department of the Treasury, Before the United States Mint at Denver Colorado Quarter Strike
date: 2006-05-24
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js4284
---
*(Archived Content)*

js-4284

 

Thank you, Tim.  I am delighted to be here at the United States Mint atDenver on this special day for the Mint, the state of Colorado and the United States of America.  Thank you, Governor Owens and First Lady Owens, for inviting me to participate in this wonderful celebration and ceremonial strike of the new Colorado quarter.

ForColorado, 2006 is a very full year of commemoration and celebration. As we strike the Colorado quarter, the 38thquarter in the enormously popular 50 State Quarter program, Colorado and the nation also celebrate the 100thanniversary of the United States Mint at Denver.  I find it simply remarkable that this facility produces 35 million coins in a single day.

This year, the nation also celebrates the 130thanniversary ofColorado statehood, the centennial of Mesa Verde National Park, the Bicentennial of Zebulon Pike's expedition to the peak now named for him, and the 125thanniversary of the Durango and Silverton railroad.

More than 140 million people collect the 50 State quarters, and are eagerly looking forward to the official launch of theColorado quarter on June 14th.  The 50 State Quarter program is an educational tool for millions of American children who learn more about the history, geography and values of a state through the designs of their quarters.   They also have fun learning about each new quarter through lessons and games on the United States Mint web site:[www.usmint.gov](http://www.usmint.gov/).

The citizens ofColorado and the Colorado Commemorative Quarter Advisory Committee, led by First Lady Frances Owens, have adeptly chosen colorful Colorado for the inscription on this coin.   Blue skies, purple mountains majesty, evergreens, red rocks, whitewater rafting, sand dunes, rainbow trout . . . the list goes on, but anyone who has traveled in Colorado already knows these colors by heart.

When they see theColorado quarter in their change, Americans will be reminded of the natural abundance, geological and cultural diversity and proud history of Colorado.  On behalf of the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the United States Mint, I congratulate all Coloradans on their beautiful 50 State quarter, a coin that perfectly reflects its beautiful, colorful state.

 

-30-
