---
title: Treasury Names Financial Attachs in Brussels and Tokyo
date: 2006-01-23
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js3084
---
*(Archived Content)*



JS-3084



Treasury announced today that it is appointing Barbara C. Matthews as the Department's Financial Attachin Brussels and Maureen Grewe to the attachpost in Tokyo. Matthews will work closely with the U.S. Mission to the European Union on financial services and macroeconomic issues, and serve as the U.S. Treasury's representative in Europe.Grewe will take over as financial attachin Tokyo in August of this year.



Matthews has recently served as senior counsel to the House Financial Services Committee where she was responsible for international issues. Prior to joining the Financial Services Committee in August of 2003, she was the Banking Advisor and Regulatory Counsel at the Institute of International Finance where she identified and analyzed key global financial and regulatory trends.



Matthews joined the Institute in 1992 as its Associate Banking Advisor until August 1994, when she left to practice law with Morrison & Foerster.She returned to the IIF in January 1996 in the expanded role of Banking Advisor & Regulatory Counsel.



Matthews earned simultaneously a J.D. and an LL.M. in Foreign and International Law from DukeLawSchool, graduating in 1991.She holds a B.Sc.F.S. from GeorgetownUniversity's School of Foreign Service, where she was inducted into Pi Sigma Alpha (the National Political Science Honor Society) and Alpha Sigma Nu (the National Jesuit Honor Society). Matthews is a member of the International Association of Financial Engineers, the American Bar Association, and the Bar of the State of New York and has been elected to the Council on Foreign Relations.



Grewe is currently serving as senior policy advisor in the East Asia Office at the Treasury Department. In this capacity she deals with a full range of Japan issues and works closely with the Embassy staff. Grewe takes over the attachpost in Tokyo after ten years at Treasury that include holding positions as: assistant financial attachin Tokyo, Treasury representative in Seoul and regional Treasury representative for Southeast Europe. Grewe has also been the Director of the Office of Middle East and South Asian Nations, special assistant for the Assistant Secretary and the Korea desk officer while at Treasury.



Prior to joining Treasury, Grewe was an assistant vice president in the commercial real estate division at Shawmut Bank, and the division financial manager for Trammell Crow's residential property division in Boston, Massachusetts.



Grewe earned an MPA degree from the WoodrowWilsonSchool at PrincetonUniversity in 1995.She has a BS in Finance and Economics from BostonCollege, graduating in 1987.Grewe is a member of the CFA Institute and has been a Chartered Financial Analyst since 1992.
