---
title: US Treasurer to Visit Texas To Reach Out to Unbanked Border Communities More Than Twice as Likely to Lack Mainstream Financial Services
date: 2006-11-30
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp183
---
*(Archived Content)*

U.S. Treasurer Anna Escobedo Cabral and Treasury Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education Dan Iannicola, Jr. will visit Edinburg, TX on Monday and Tuesday, December 4-5, to participate in a regional conference to reach the unbanked.  Treasury will host financial literacy events throughout the day to help families take control of their finances, save for retirement and understand the importance of establishing credit.

Approximately 10 million or more unbanked households in America do not have accounts at mainstream financial institutions and must pay extraordinarily high fees for basic financial services.  An estimated 23 percent of families living in rural U.S.-Mexico border communities are unbanked, more than twice the national average.

Members of the press should contact Brittni Aldridge at 202-622-2591 to attend any events.

**Schedule of Press Events for Monday, Dec. 4: 8:00 a.m. CST**Treasury Deputy Assistant Secretary Dan Iannicola Jr.Financial Education Lesson with Freddy Gonzalez Elementary StudentsFreddy Gonzalez Elementary School2401 South Sugar RoadEdinburg, TX**9:00 a.m. CST**U.S. Treasurer Anna Escobedo CabralMedia AvailabilityUniversity of Texas Pan-AmericanAdministrative and Academic Support Annex2412 South Highway 281Edinburg, TX**9:30 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. CST**U.S. Treasurer Anna Escobedo CabralTreasury Deputy Assistant Secretary Dan Iannicola Jr.National Credit Union Administration Chairman JoAnn JohnsonFinancial Literacy and Education Commission'sSouthwest Regional Conference on Reaching Unbanked PeopleUniversity of Texas Pan-AmericanAdministrative and Academic Support Annex2412 South Highway 281Edinburg, TX**5:30 p.m. CST**Treasury Deputy Assistant Secretary Dan Iannicola Jr.Office of Congressman Hinojosa's Community Event on Personal Financial EducationAdministrative and Academic Support Annex2412 South Highway 281Edinburg, TX**Schedule of Press Events for Tuesday, Dec. 5: 9:00 a.m. CST**Luz Figuereo, Treasury Office of Financial EducationFinancial education lessons with La Villa high school studentsLa Villa High School200 West Highway 107La Villa, Texas
