---
title: Treasury Department Releases DVD on Identity Theft to Help Better Protect Consumers from Financial Fraud
date: 2006-01-26
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js3087
---
*(Archived Content)*



js-3087



The Treasury Department today launched a DVD created by the Department's Critical Infrastructure Protection Office to inform consumers by defining what identity theft is, how they can protect themselves, and what they should do if they become a victim.



Identity thieves threaten one of consumers' most valuable assets their credit history. They also prey upon some of the most vulnerablethe families of the recently deceased, seniors, and hospital patients for example.In addition, their crime attacks the trust and security that nurtures our open economy, said Randy Quarles, Under Secretary for Domestic Finance. This crime cannot be tolerated. With strong laws in place, a dedication to strict enforcement of those laws and the most powerful tool knowledge in the hands of consumers, we can outsmart these criminals. I'm pleased to announce the creation and release of this learning tool that will help consumers become their own first line of defense.



The DVD, entitled Identity Theft: Outsmarting the Crooks, features experts from the government and the private sector talking about the scope of the identity theft problem and how a few simple steps can significantly increase protection. Experts also cover topics such as: online safety; access to credit reports; taxpayer vulnerabilities to identity theft; and dealing with debt collectors if you are a victim of identity theft.



Viewers see how a typical victim of identity theft resolves her situation by working with law enforcement officials, credit reporting agencies, and financial institutions.



The DVD features a resource library of materials that can be downloaded from a personal computer, including sample forms and letters that victims can use in reporting the crime and collecting evidence.Selected web links lead to additional useful information.



President Bush recognized the threat of identity theft early in his Administration and has displayed a record of leadership in combating it. The President has enacted two pieces of major legislation that give consumers, law enforcement and financial institutions new tools to fight identity theft as well as help victims restore their credit:


- **The Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act**signed Dec. 4, 2003 gives consumers easier access to credit information so they can spot inaccuracies and unauthorized activity; increases the security of credit card numbers when purchases are made; makes it easier for victims to get the word out that their identity has been stolen by allowing them to place an alert in their credit file indicating that requests for credit may be bogus; and helps merchants spot ID thieves at work by establishing a list of activities that will raise red flags when someone is trying to open new lines of credit.
- **The Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act **signed July 15, 2004 provides tougher penalties, including jail time, for people who engage in the crime of identity theft. This statute created a new crime of aggravated identity theft and increased federal criminal penalties for this crime.Identity thieves can be sentenced for an underlying crime, like mail fraud, and face an additional, consecutive sentence for identity theft.This encourages prosecutors to pursue the identity crime as well as the underlying or related ones.


The Treasury Department continues to work aggressively with the financial services industry to find more ways to address identity theft. Treasury, in conjunction with the IRS and the FDIC, held a series of outreach meetings in cities across the country to educate consumers on how they can protect themselves from becoming victims of identity theft.



In the creation of this DVD, Treasury worked with: the Federal Trade Commission, Departments of Justice and Defense, the U.S. Secret Service, the U.S. Postal Office, the American Bankers Association, National Association of Federal Credit Unions, the Consumer Data Industry Association and the Florida Bankers Association.



The disk includes English subtitles for the hearing impaired and Spanish language dubbing.It can be viewed individually via a computer or DVD player or in a group learning environment.A PowerPoint presentation available from the resource library tracks the content of the video and can be used as a teaching aid or handout.The DVD runs approximately 80 minutes but can be viewed selectively in shorter segments on specific topics.



Consumers can obtain the DVD from the Federal CitizenInformationCenter address in Pueblo, Colo. for a handling charge of $2 (order information below).



*Mail FCIC -05B, **PO Box 100**, **Pueblo**, **CO****81002**Phone 1-888-8 **PUEBLO**Fax 719-948-9724**Internet www.pueblo.gsa.gov**Order Code Number 635NN**Item DVD: Identity Theft: Outsmarting the Crooks*



**For more information check out Treasury's Identity Theft Resource page at: **



**http://www.treas.gov/offices/domestic-finance/financial-institution/cip/identity-theft.shtml **

  

-30-
