---
title: U.S. Treasury Names Chief Economist for International Affairs
date: 2006-02-13
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js4044
---
*(Archived Content)*



JS-4044



The Treasury Department announced today that Marvin J. Barth has been named Chief Economist for International Affairs and Director of Research and Risk Analysis. He brings to the Department a breadth of international experience from public, private and multilateral institutions, with a strong background in economics, finance, and markets.



Prior to joining the Department of the Treasury, Barth was the Global Currency Economist at Citigroup (2003-2006), where he was responsible for fundamental analysis of major currency markets, forecasting exchange rates, and advising Citigroup's top financial and corporate customers on risks and opportunities in foreign exchange markets. As an Economist in the Division of International Finance at the Federal Reserve Board (1998-2001 and 2002-2003), Barth monitored all non-U.S. financial markets and reported to the Board on developing risks, with an emphasis on emerging markets. Early in his tenure at the Board, Barth analyzed and forecast real economic developments in Southeast Asian economies. From 2001-2002, Barth was a visiting scholar at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, Switzerland, where he studied developments in the global economy and financial markets.



Barth's education in Economics includes a Ph.D. (1998, University of California, San Diego), an M.A. (1996, University of California, San Diego), and a B.A. (1992, University of California, Berkeley).



This is a new position in the International Affairs Office.
