---
title: Treasury Announces New Official Appointees
date: 2007-07-17T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp492
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-492

**Washington-** The Treasury Department today announced the appointment of seven officials and senior staff members, including:

The Treasury Department today announced the appointment of seven officials and senior staff members, including:

Bob Foster

** Deputy Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs (Banking & Finance)**

Deputy Assistant Secretary Foster oversees the Department's legislative communications and advises the Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs on issues affecting domestic banking and finance policy. He began serving at the Treasury in July.

Foster served on Capitol Hill for nearly 19 years and comes to Treasury most recently from The Twenty-First Century Group, where he served as Vice President. He first served in the office of Congressman Michael Oxley and moved with the Chairman to the House Committee on Financial Services in 2001 as a Deputy Staff Director, Staff Director and later Chief of Staff. Foster worked closely with Chairman Oxley to help pass laws such as the Sarbanes Oxley Act, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, the International Anti-Bribery and Fair Competition Act of 1998, the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act and its reauthorization, the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act, the Credit Rating Agency Duopoly Relief Act and the Federal Deposit Insurance Reform Act.

A native of Purcellville, Va., Foster holds a B.A. in Economics from Virginia Tech.

** Cheh Kim Deputy Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs (Appropriations & Management)**

Deputy Assistant Secretary Kim oversees the Department's legislative communications and advises the Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs on issues affecting appropriations funding and management policy and operations. He began working at the Department in May.

Kim served on Capitol Hill for over 12 years and comes to Treasury most recently from the Senate Appropriations Committee where he served as Professional Staff Member of the Transportation, HUD, and Related Agencies Subcommittee. He first served in the office of Senator Connie Mack, who chaired the Senate Banking Committee's Housing Opportunity and Community Development Subcommittee. He then moved to the Senate Appropriations Committee, where he was responsible for and worked with the Chairman in passing annual appropriations laws that funded and affected policy related to, among others, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Department of the Treasury, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and the National Science Foundation. Prior to his service on Capitol Hill, Kim was employed at the U.S. General Accounting Office for four years as a Senior Evaluator.

Originally from Ann Arbor, Mich., Kim holds a B.A. in History from the University of Michigan.

** Jeremiah O. Norton Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions Policy ** Deputy Assistant Secretary Norton oversees the Office of Financial Institutions Policy, which develops, analyzes, and coordinates the Department's policies on legislative and regulatory issues affecting financial institutions. The Office's principle focus is on issues dealing with safety and soundness, market structure, condition, and competitiveness, and regulatory structure. Norton also oversees the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program, the Treasury office that implements and manages the program created by the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002. He began serving as Deputy Assistant Secretary in June.

Norton served on the legislative staff of Representative Edward R. Royce, a senior Member of the House Committee on Financial Services. In this capacity, he served as the primary adviser on issues such as banking, insurance, securities, and government sponsored enterprises. Prior to joining Representative Royce, Norton worked in the Financial Institutions and Governments investment banking group at J.P. Morgan Securities, Inc.

A native of McLean, Va., Norton received an A.B. in Economics from Duke University, and a J.D. from the Georgetown University Law Center.

** Stacy Carlson Speechwriter for the Secretary ** Carlson serves as Senior Speechwriter for the Secretary of the Treasury. She began working for the Secretary in April.

Carlson most recently was a freelance business writer; her clients included the White House Writers Group, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and Bisnow on Business.  She has held senior management positions at Silicon Valley Bank, Imperial Bank and Square 1 Bank.  Carlson served as the Director of the Washington office for Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, Staff Director at the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on House Administration under Chairman Bill Thomas and as a senior public policy advisor at Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld, LLC and the Motion Picture Association of America, Inc.

A native of Bakersfield, Cali., Carlson received an M.B.A. from Stanford University and a B.A. in Economics from California State University, Bakersfield.

** Ted Gayer Deputy Assistant Secretary for Microeconomic Analysis ** Deputy Assistant Secretary Gayer oversees the Office of Microeconomic Anaylsis, which is responsible for the review and analysis of domestic microeconomic issues and developments in the financial markets. He directs research to assist in the formulation and articulation of public policies and positions of the Treasury Department and the Administration on a wide range of economic issues, including pensions, health care, retirement income security, flood and terrorism insurance, and various aspects of specific industries and sectors of the economy. He also represents the Treasury Secretary, Managing Trustee of the Social Security and Medicare Trust Funds, in preparation of the Annual Trustees' Reports. Gayer began working at the Treasury in July.

Gayer most recently worked at Georgetown University, where he was an Associate Professor of Public Policy. Previously, he was a Visiting Fellow from Georgetown to the Public Policy Institute of California in San Francisco. He also worked for the American Enterprise Institute, the President's Council of Economic Advisors, and the University of California at Berkeley. His research and teaching has focused on the fields of environmental and regulatory economics, public finance, and applied microeconomics.

Born in Brooklyn, N.Y., Gayer received a B.A. from Emory University and an M.A. and Ph.D. from Duke University.

** Christine McDaniel Deputy Assistant Secretary of Policy Coordination ** Deputy Assistant Secretary McDaniel oversees the Office of Policy Coordination, responsible for economic policy coordination on a range of issues related to globalization, such as international trade and investment, labor market adjustment assistance, productivity and economic growth, and the development and analysis of the President's economic initiatives. McDaniel began serving at the Department in March.

Prior to joining Treasury, McDaniel served as the senior economist for international trade at the Council of Economic Advisers for nearly two years, providing advice on national and international economic policy, including international trade and investment, immigration, and intellectual property rights.  She has also worked as an international economist for the U.S. International Trade Commission, the U.S. Department of Commerce, and the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.

A native of Rockford, Ill., McDaniel received her B.A. in Economics and Japanese Studies from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and her Ph.D. in Economics from the University of Colorado, specializing in International Trade and Finance and Econometrics.

** Jeremy Rudd Deputy Assistant Secretary for Macroeconomic Analysis ** Deputy Assistant Secretary Rudd oversees the Office of Macroeconomic Analysis, responsible for analyzing and forecasting current macroeconomic developments. He started working at the Treasury in May.

Rudd is on leave from the Federal Reserve Board, where he was an economist in the Division of Research and Statistics for eight years. Prior to his coming to the Federal Reserve, he served as an economist at the Treasury Department from 1998 to 1999 and at the Council of Economic Advisers in 1993 to 1994 and 1997 to 1998.  His research interests include inflation and price measurement, consumption, and monetary policy.

A native of Rockville, Md., Rudd received his A.B. in Economics from Harvard University, and his Ph.D. in Economics from Princeton University.

