---
title: Treasury Secretary Paulson and MRS. Laura Bush Tour the Restoration and Modernization of the Treasury Building
date: 2007-01-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp221
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free Adobe® Acrobat® Reader®. *

U.S. Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson and Mrs. Laura Bush will mark the restoration and modernization of the Treasury Building with a tour of the building and a ceremonial ribbon cutting this week.

The Treasury Department completed a ten year, four-phase restoration and modernization project in October of 2006, the first in almost 100 years. Many of the most historic features of the building have been carefully restored and in some cases presented in ways that have not been seen since the early 1870s, including the décor of the Andrew Johnson Suite and the ceiling in the Salmon Chase Suite. During the restoration project, the Department also was able to collect and document architectural artifacts that span the 19th and 20th centuries. The project also allowed the Department to update the systems, infrastructure, and safety features of the building. For example, energy efficient lighting fixtures that replicate the historic fixtures were installed. A public-private partnership with the Treasury Historical Association resulted in the restoration of the decorative gilding on the Cash Room ceiling and restoration of the West Dome.

**Who** U. S. Treasury Secretary Henry M. PaulsonMrs. Laura Bush** What** Building Tour and Ribbon Cutting** When** Thursday, January 11, 2007, 9:10 a.m. EST** Where** Department of the TreasuryCash Room1500 Pennsylvania Ave., NWWashington, DC** Note** Building tour is a pooled eventribbon cutting is open to the presspress attending the ribbon cutting must arrive by 7:30 a.m.** REPORTS**

- [Attached White House press schedule for credential information.](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/treasury.pdf)
