---
title: Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. Remarks at Screening of Alexander Hamilton The Cash Room Thursday, April 26, 2007
date: 2007-04-26T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp382
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-382

Thank you very much and welcome to the Treasury Department. We're pleased to host the premiere screening of*Alexander Hamilton*. Thank you to Bruce Cole and the National Endowment for the Humanities for supporting this project; to PBS for sponsoring and airing the movie as part of the American Experience series; to Twin Cities Public Television and Middlemarch Films for bringing the movie to life; and to the scholars and actors who put so much energy into the production. I'd also like to extend a special welcome to former Treasury Secretary Nick Brady and his wife, Kitty. Wendy and I have very much appreciated their hospitality and friendship as they have welcomed us to Washington. Welcome back to Treasury, Mr. Secretary.

Alexander Hamilton is very important to this Department – he was its founding Secretary. As you all know he was one of our truly great Founding Fathers. Though Hamilton never served here in Washington, Treasury employees are frequently reminded of his role in our history – as they walk down Alexander Hamilton Place, pass the statue of Alexander Hamilton on the south side of the building, or see the portrait of Hamilton outside the Secretary's suite. A select few Treasury employees are recognized for their service to the Department and to our country with the Alexander Hamilton Award, which is the highest honor bestowed by Treasury. And when visitors come to see me, I like to show off the Alexander Hamilton silver, which is on display in the conference room next to my office.

For most Americans, their most frequent interaction with Hamilton is when they use a ten-dollar bill. Many of us remember from school days that Hamilton was killed in a duel with Vice President Aaron Burr on the cliffs of Weehawken, New Jersey.

As an author of the Federalist Papers, Hamilton rallied support for the federal Constitution. As the first Treasury Secretary, he built confidence in our nation's ability to repay its obligations by assuming state war debts. He also promoted commerce and manufacturing as the route to prosperity, and helped establish a national bank to support a growing financial system. In many ways he was the father of our nation's financial system. Alexander Hamilton saw the vast economic potential of the United States and he set us on the path to achieving it. The fact that I have always been a great admirer of Hamilton makes the opportunity to serve as Treasury Secretary particularly meaningful to me.

The movie we're about to see will offer Americans a detailed view of this very important yet often overlooked Founding Father. I am really looking forward to the show. But first, I'd like to introduce the Chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, Bruce Cole, to say a few words.
