---
title: Treasury Department Names Mina Nguyen as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Business Affairs and Public Liaison
date: 2007-02-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp259
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-259

The Treasury Department announced that Mina Nguyen has been appointed as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Business Affairs and Public Liaison.

In this position, Nguyen will manage the Treasury Department's outreach to the business, advocacy, and financial community. She will advise Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson and the agency's leadership on economic and international issues. She will solicit information, analysis, and opinions from public and private organizations representing business and consumer interests, and will communicate Treasury and the Bush administration views to these organizations.

Immediately prior to this appointment, Nguyen served as Director of Government Affairs of the Republican National Committee, where she was responsible for coordinating legislative plans and messaging with the United States Congress and managing key activities with business and trade organizations.

Previously, Nguyen served as the National Business and the Northeast Regional Coalitions Director for the Bush-Cheney 2004 campaign, and before that the Director of Public Liaison and Special Assistant to Labor Secretary Elaine L. Chao. She also worked as a Management Consultant in Accenture's Strategy practice.

Nguyen earned her degree in business administration from University of California, Berkley.
