---
title: U.S. and China to Hold Meeting of the Strategic Economic Dialogue in China Next Month
date: 2007-11-20T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp694
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

Washington, DC – Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. will lead the U.S. delegation to China next month for the next meeting of the[U.S.-China Strategic Economic Dialogue](http://treas.gov/initiatives/us-china/). Secretary Paulson will be joined by Commerce Secretary Carlos Gutierrez, Health and Human Services Secretary Mike Leavitt, U.S. Trade Representative Susan Schwab, EPA Administrator Stephen Johnson, Acting Agriculture Secretary Chuck Conner, and other Administration officials.

The third Cabinet-level meeting of the SED will focus on integrity of trade, balanced economic development, energy conservation, financial sector reform, environmental sustainability, and advancing bilateral investment. The dialogue was launched by President Bush and President Hu in September 2006.

China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) will issue credentials to all media planning to cover the SED. If you are seeking press credentials, you must complete and submit the attached form along with a digital passport photo to the Treasury Department's Office of Public Affairs at[press@treasury.gov](mailto:press@treasury.gov)no later than Thursday, November 29. Treasury will submit the information to the MFA on November 30 – this deadline will be enforced by the MFA.

The talks will take place December 12-13 near Beijing at Grand Epoch City.

 

**REPORTS**

- [Press Credential Registration Form](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/sedpressregform2007.pdf)
