---
title: Treasury Secretary Paulson to Visit Guatemala and Peru Next Week
date: 2007-03-14T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp316
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. will travel to Latin America next week to discuss economic progress in the region as well as the region's efforts to bring new opportunities, continued poverty reduction and an expanded middle class to its people. Latin America has been a long-time interest for Secretary Paulson and is a key priority for him as Treasury Secretary.

Paulson will arrive in Guatemala City Monday for the annual meeting of the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). There he will hold meetings with finance ministers and heads of state where he will stress the U.S. stake in the economic success of Latin America and the Caribbean.

In recent years, many governments have strengthened their policies, shored up public finances, reduced debt vulnerability, and opened markets creating stronger economic growth, said Secretary Paulson. My goal is to work with leaders in the region to ensure that more people share in the benefits created by economic growth and trade opportunities.

Additionally, he will discuss the IDB's initiative to provide debt relief to five of the region's poorest countries: Bolivia, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras and Nicaragua. At the Summit of the Americas in 2005 President Bush called on the Treasury Department to work with the IDB to provide debt relief for the region's poorest countries in order to lift the burden of poverty and promote opportunity in the region. The Treasury Department worked closely with the IDB over the past year to develop a proposal that would both provide debt reduction and sustain the financial viability of the IDB for future lending. (Click here for more information on the debt relief initiative:[https://auth.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/hp172](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/hp172).)

While in Guatemala Secretary Paulson will also meet with business school students for a conversation on economic developments in the region.

Secretary Paulson will then travel to Lima to meet with government officials, local business leaders, and students to discuss, among other topics, President Garcia's and Finance Minister Carranza's pro-market policies, with their focus on growth, poverty reduction, and sound public finances. Secretary Paulson will underscore the importance the United States attaches to President Garcia's economic success in translating growth into poverty reduction.

The visits to Guatemala and Peru will be the Secretary's first in those countries as Treasury Secretary. Paulson's first international trip after becoming Secretary was to Latin America to attend the inauguration of Colombian President Uribe in August of 2006.

The following events are open to media:

**Who ** Assistant Secretary for International Affairs Clay Lowery ** What ** Pre-Trip Pen and Pad Briefing ** When ** Friday, March 16, 3:30 p.m. (EDT)** Where ** Department of the Treasury1500 Pennsylvania Ave., NWWest Gables Room - 5432Washington, DC ** Note ** No cameras will be admitted to the briefing. Media without Treasury press credentials should contact Frances Anderson with full name, Social Security number, and date of birth at[Frances.Anderson@do.treas.gov](mailto:Frances.Anderson@do.treas.gov)or 202-622-2960.

* Who **Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr.Assistant Secretary for International Affairs Clay Lowery ** What ** Press Conference ** When ** Monday, March 19, Exact Time TBA ** Where ** InterContinental Hotel14 Calle 2-51Zona 10, Guatemala City
