---
title: Approaches to Improve the Competitiveness of the U.S. Business Tax System for the 21st Century
date: 2007-12-20
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp749
---
*(Archived Content)*

**A Summary Approach 1:**Replacing the Business Income Tax System with a Business Activity Tax (BAT)

- The BAT tax base would be gross receipts from sales of goods and services minus purchases of goods and services (including purchases of capital items) from other businesses.
- Wages and other forms of employee compensation (such as fringe benefits) would not be deductible.
- Interest would be removed from the tax base -- it would neither be included in income nor deductible.
- Individual level taxes on dividends and capital gains would be retained.Interest income received by individuals would be taxed at the current 15 percent dividends and capital gains rates.
- This approach is estimated to improve economic performance, ultimately increasing the size of the economy by roughly 2.0 percent to 2.5 percent.
- This kind of reform would have various implementation and administrative issues.

**Approach 2:**Broadening the Business Tax Base and Lowering the Statutory Tax Rate/Providing Expensing

- Broadening the business tax base by eliminating all special provisions would allow:–The top federal business tax rate to be lowered to 28 percent.–If accelerated depreciation is retained, the rate would drop only to 31 percent–Alternatively, acquisitions of new investment could be partially expensed (35% could be written off immediately).–Treasury analyses show that the revenue-neutral rate reduction provides little economic impact, and expensing would provide benefits only to certain industries.
- More significant benefits to the economy and U.S. competitiveness might be achieved through a substantially lower business tax rate (e.g., 20 percent) or greater expensing (e.g., 65 percent).–Such a reduction would require non-revenue neutral reform of the business tax system.
- The present U.S. international tax system may result in a competitive disadvantage for U.S. companies competing with foreign-based companies.
- The present international tax system distorts economic behavior by:–Discouraging repatriation of foreign earnings; and–Encouraging significant tax planning.

**Approach 3:**Specific Areas of our Current Business Tax System That Could be Addressed

- Multiple taxation of corporate profits–Corporate capital gains and dividends received deduction
- Tax bias favoring debt finance
- Taxation of international income
- Treatment of losses
- Book-tax conformity
- Other areas to improve tax administration

**NOTE:**The approaches presented in this study are not intended to be all inclusive and do not favor one approach over another.**REPORTS**

- [Study: Approaches to Improve the Competitiveness of the U.S. Business Tax System for the 21st Century](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/hp749_approachesstudy.pdf)
