---
title: Making Health Insurance Affordable for More Americans
date: 2007-01-29T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp238
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free Adobe® Acrobat® Reader®. *

HP-238

*Examples under President Bush's Standard Deduction Health Insurance Plan***Example 1: An uninsured family of four***Note: All figures are for 2009, the first year the policy is in effect.*

Family #1

• A family of four earns $60,000 in total compensation, but all of it comes in the form of wages, i.e.

they do not get health insurance through their employer.

• On the non-group market, they would pay $5,100 for an average policy, and $4,100 for a basic lowcost

policy.1

• Under current law, the family receives no tax benefit for purchasing health insurance and is treated

unfairly relative to those workers who receive health care through their employer.

President's Proposal:

• If this family buys health insurance, they deduct $15,000, which reduces their taxable income from

$60,000 to $45,000. This deduction lowers their taxes (income and payroll) by $4,545.

• If this family bought an average policy ($5,100), the cost of the insurance would, in effect, drop to

$555 ($5,100-$4,545=$555).

• If this same family bought the basic low-cost policy ($4,100), the family would get back $445

($4,100-$4,545= –$445); they end up with $445 more than if they remain uninsured!

1 The parents of the two children are assumed to be 35 years old in 2009.

**REPORTS**

- [Examples under President Bush’s Standard Deduction Health Insurance Plan.](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/examples01.28.06.pdf)
