---
title: Treasury Action Targets Violent Burmese Suppression
date: 2007-09-27T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp578
---
*(Archived Content)*

hp-578

The U.S. Department of the Treasury today is designating 14 senior Burmese Government officials in the wake of that government's longstanding oppression of the Burmese people and its recent use of violence against peaceful demonstrators. Treasury's action follows President George W. Bush's announcement of plans for tightening U.S. sanctions against the military regime in Burma, made before the UN General Assembly on September 25, 2007.

We are today imposing sanctions against senior officials of the Government of Burma, said Adam Szubin, Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC). The President has made clear that we will not stand by as the regime tries to silence the voices of the Burmese people through repression and intimidation.

The designations were made pursuant to Executive Order 13310, which authorizes the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to designate senior officials of the Government of Burma, the State Peace and Development Council of Burma (the military regime that rules Burma), the Union Solidarity and Development Association of Burma, or any of their successor organizations, as well as any individuals or entities that are owned or controlled by, or acting for or on behalf of, any person, whose property or interests in property are blocked pursuant to the order. Executive Order 13310 also blocked property and interests in property of the four entities listed on its Annex, the State Peace and Development Council of Burma and three banks controlled by the Government of Burma.

The Burmese government leaders designated today by OFAC include Senior General Than Shwe, Minister of Defense and Chairman of the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC); Vice Senior General Maung Aye, Commander of the Army and Vice Chairman of the SPDC; Lieutenant General Thein Sein, Acting Prime Minister and First Secretary of the SPDC; and General Thura Shwe Mann, Joint Chief of Staff, Armed Forces and Member of the SPDC. The other senior officials of the Government of Burma named include other members of the State Peace and Development Council, key military officials, and other government ministers.

As a result of Treasury's designations, any assets these individuals and entities may have that are within U.S. jurisdiction must be frozen, and U.S. persons are prohibited from transacting or doing business with them.

