---
title: Treasury Announces the Appointment of Gambrell to Serve as Director of the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund
date: 2007-11-09
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp674
---
*(Archived Content)*

  

Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. today announced the appointment of Donna Gambrell to serve as Director of Treasury's Community Development Financial Institutions Fund.  The appointment is effective November 26, 2007.



As Director of the CDFI Fund, Gambrell will oversee the expansion of access to capital and financial services in critically under-served urban, rural and Native American communities, where one of the biggest obstacles to economic development is a lack of access to mainstream sources of private sector capital.



Gambrell comes to CDFI from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) where she served as Deputy Director, Consumer Protection and Community Affairs in the Division of Supervision and Consumer Protection. She began her career with the FDIC in April 1991 as a Community Affairs Officer for the New York Region.



In 2006, Gambrell worked on the GulfCoast rebuilding efforts in Louisiana and Mississippi where she spearheaded partnerships among financial institutions, government agencies, and community-based organizations to promote community and economic development in areas devastated by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita including low and moderate-income neighborhoods.



Prior to joining the FDIC, Gambrell worked at the Resolution Trust Corporation (1989-1991), the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (1987-1989), and the U.S. General Accounting Office (1979-1987).



Gambrell is a graduate of TowsonStateUniversity and received a masters of science degree from New YorkUniversity. In 2004, she received a National Public Service Award for her innovative work over the years in formulating public-private partnerships.



**- 30 -**
