---
title: Paulson, IRS To Push Use Of Credit Helping Low-Income, Working Americans
date: 2007-01-26T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp231
---
*(Archived Content)*

U.S. Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. will join U.S. Treasurer Anna Escobedo Cabral and IRS Commissioner Mark W. Everson on Thursday, February 1 to promote the earned income tax credit (EITC), which has brought millions of low-income, working Americans out of poverty.

A recent Census study found that 4.6 million people – including 2.4 million children – were lifted out of poverty in 2002, thanks to the Earned Income Tax Credit.  The EITC is already the government's largest cash assistance program targeted to low-income Americans. Many taxpayers are eligible but fail to claim the credit.

The Treasury and the IRS will promote EITC Day, a nationwide campaign to promote the EITC and free tax preparation services for working families. Advocates of EITC and free tax preparation sites also will be on hand. **Who ** Secretary Henry M. PaulsonTreasurer Anna Escobedo CabralCommissioner Mark W. Everson ** What ** EITC Awareness Day ** When ** Thursday February 1, 2:30 p.m. (EDT)** Where ** Department of TreasuryMedia Room 41211500 Pennsylvania Ave., NWWashington, DC

Media interested in attending the event at the Treasury Department must have Treasury press credentials or should contact Frances Anderson for clearance at (202) 622-2960 or[Frances.Anderson@do.treas.gov](mailto:Frances.Anderson@do.treas.gov)with the following information: name, Social Security number, and date of birth.
