---
title: Treasury Department Appoints Michael Duffy as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Information Systems and Chief Information Officer
date: 2007-09-14T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp557
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-557

The Treasury Department announced this week the appointment of Michael Duffy as the Department's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Information Systems and Chief Information Officer. Duffy comes to Treasury from the U.S. Department of Justice where he served as Deputy Chief Information Officer, eGovernment for the past four years. The appointment is effective September 10, 2007.

In his 15 years in the Justice Department's CIO office, Duffy directed the development and implementation of the national strategy to exchange criminal investigative and intelligence data across all jurisdictions. Duffy led the implementation of a multi-agency wireless communications system for federal law enforcement and homeland security field operations. He has also worked with the Office of Management and Budget to implement multiple eGovernment initiatives.

The Deputy Assistant Secretary for Information Systems/Chief Information Officer serves as Treasury's principal advisor on information technology issues. This position is responsible for acquiring and managing information resources and provides broad leadership in planning, budgeting, acquiring, and managing Departmental and bureau technology resources.

Duffy will also formulate policies and programs to maximize the value of technology investments and manage investment risks across the Department. In partnership with the CIO Council, the CIO ensures that Department-wide and enterprise-wide corporate systems development, integration, and operational and security issues are addressed.

Duffy has a B.A. from Bowdoin College and a Masters in public administration from the University of Massachusetts.

