---
title: Prepared Remarks of Office of Foreign Assets Control Director Adam J. Szubin on the Treasury Department’s Role in Addressing the Situation in Darfur Before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs
date: 2007-10-03
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp590
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-590

**Washington, DC**-- Chairman Dodd, Ranking Member Shelby and Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today about the Treasury Department's role in addressing the situation in Darfur and the Sudanese Government's support for terrorism, as well as its views regarding the various Sudan-related pieces of legislation that are pending in the Congress. I welcome the Committee's interest in these matters, and want to take this opportunity to thank the Committee for its continued support of Treasury and OFAC and its mission over the years, in particular as we have pursued sanctions against governments like Sudan.  

We share an acute concern about the devastating suffering in Darfur, and an understanding that economic pressure can play an important role in bringing about a political resolution to this complex situation. Secretary Paulson has made it clear that we should spare no effort in using all tools at the Treasury Department's disposal to advance this goal. For OFAC, and for myself in particular, imposing smart and effective pressure on Sudan has been a foremost priority.

**Treasury Department Actions against Sudan**The Scope of Sanctions

The United States has levied economic sanctions against Sudan since 1997. At that time, the Government of Sudan's support for international terrorism and widespread human rights violations led President Clinton to impose comprehensive trade sanctions against Sudan, and block all property of the Government of Sudan in the United States or within the control of U.S. persons anywhere in the world.

Acting with Congress, President Bush amended these broad sanctions in 2006 to carve out certain areas from our sanctions, notably Southern Sudan and Darfur, provided that the relevant transactions do not involve Sudan's petroleum or petrochemical industries or any property or property interest of the Government of Sudan.

In addition to these comprehensive sanctions, the President recently imposed strict economic sanctions against persons responsible for violence or atrocities in Darfur. Issued in accordance with actions taken by the United Nations Security Council, Executive Order 13400 blocked the property of four individuals connected to the conflict in Darfur. It also authorized the Treasury Department to block the property and interests in property of persons determined to: constitute a threat to the peace process in, and stability of, Darfur; be responsible for conduct related to the conflict in Darfur that violates international law; be responsible for heinous conduct with respect to human life or limb related to the conflict in Darfur; have supplied, sold, or transferred arms or any related materiel related to military activities to the warring parties in Darfur; or be responsible for offensive military overflights in and over the Darfur region. Treasury's authority applies as well to those determined to have materially assisted or supported, or to have acted for or on behalf of, any of the above.

Recent Actions

A primary objective of these sanctions, of course, has been to alter the behavior of those responsible for the terrible suffering in Darfur, first and foremost the Sudanese Government of President Bashir. This past April, on Holocaust Memorial Day, the President issued a clear warning to the Sudanese Government. Either they would live up to their prior commitments and allow the deployment of a joint United Nations-African Union peacekeeping force, or the United States would impose further economic sanctions on the Sudanese Government and seek a United Nations Security Council Resolution to do likewise.

When President Bashir did not follow through, President Bush did. On May 29, Treasury announced the designation of three additional Sudanese individuals and thirty-one additional Sudanese companies subject to the asset freeze strictures of Executive Orders 13067, 13400, and 13412. We imposed sanctions against three individuals and one company because of their role in the ongoing violence in Darfur. We designated Ahmad Muhammed Harun, Sudan's State Minister for Humanitarian Affairs, and Awad Ibn Auf, Sudan's head of Military Intelligence and Security, who are among Khartoum's senior leadership and have acted as liaisons between the Sudanese government and the Government-supported Janjaweed militias. We also designated Khalil Ibrahim, leader of the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM), a rebel group that has been responsible for a number of violent incidents, and the Azza Air Transport company, which had been conveying artillery, small arms, and ammunition to Sudanese government forces and Janjaweed militia in Darfur for their activities in Darfur.

Simultaneously, we targeted 30 additional companies owned or controlled by the Government of Sudan, thereby subjecting them to the asset freeze imposed on the Government by Executive Orders 13067 and 13412.  These targeted companies included five petrochemical companies, Sudan's national telecommunications company, and an entity that has supplied armored vehicles to the Sudanese Government for military operations in Darfur.

In addition to these actions to strengthen our financial measures against Sudan, we have stepped up enforcement of our Sudan sanctions, and have made such enforcement a top priority within OFAC. While I cannot comment on specific open enforcement cases, I can tell you that we are aggressively pursuing a number of violators to expose and penalize those who are violating our sanctions and deter those who might think of doing so.

In this regard, I would like to thank the Chairman and this Committee for its support in passing S. 1612, the International Emergency Economic Powers Enhancement Act, which provides for increased civil penalties for violations of IEEPA – the statute pursuant to which our sanctions against Sudan are imposed. We have sought these increased penalties in no small part because we faced impediments to obtaining meaningful enforcement of our sanctions against Sudan. The passage of this bill will provide a strong tool to make our sanctions effective.

It can be notoriously difficult to measure and attribute the impact of sanctions, when the ultimate objective is a change in regime behavior. It is certainly true that our sanctions were watched very carefully in Khartoum and taken seriously. Immediately after the sanctions were announced, the Sudanese Government took steps to sell off Government assets that we had identified and its Central Bank imposed broad restrictions on the movement of foreign currency. And, most importantly, we believe that the new U.S. sanctions – and the threat of international sanctions along similar lines – played a role in President Bashir's announcement in early June that Sudan would allow the deployment of a joint African Union-United Nations peacekeeping force in Darfur.

In addition to ensuring that our sanctions have the maximum possible effect on the Government of Sudan (GOS), we are also taking steps to protect the Government of Southern Sudan (GOSS) and humanitarian aid efforts in Darfur and elsewhere. We have prepared regulations that will help clarify the scope of sanctions with respect to South Sudan, Darfur and other exempt areas, and hope that those regulations will spur interest in investment and economic development in the South. And to facilitate the vital assistance activities of our State Department and USAID colleagues and those in the NGO community, we are licensing humanitarian work. Since January, 2006, we have issued approximately 87 licenses and registered approximately 48 NGOs to conduct this critical assistance work.

**Pending Legislation Concerning Sudan**We appreciate and share the concerns that animate the various pieces of Sudan-related legislation pending before Congress. Let there be no mistake – these concerns are deeply shared by the Treasury Department and the entire Administration.

A Government-Generated List

In imposing economic sanctions or other measures against Sudan – or any other regime – we must always keep in mind the ultimate goals of those sanctions. While the Department shares the Committee's and the Congress' goal of increasing pressure on the Sudanese government to end the violence in Darfur, we have several concerns with the various legislative proposals that have been introduced and discussed in the Congress.

Of particular concern are the various proposals that would require either the President or the Secretary of the Treasury to prepare a list of all companies engaged in specified business activities in Sudan. The preparation and publication of such a list raise a series of significant concerns for the Department, and may not add much value, given that non-governmental organizations have produced such lists for purposes of divestment.

A primary concern with the creation of such a list is the impact it is likely to have on our ability to maintain multilateral pressure on the regime in Khartoum. Because of the United States' broad sanctions against Sudan, no U.S. companies are likely to be included on such a list, as investment by such companies in Sudan is generally prohibited absent a license from OFAC. Consequently, the list would consist of foreign companies whose activities in Sudan are most likely legal in their home countries. Such a list likely will be viewed by our allies as a U.S. Government "blacklist" – not of Sudanese government entities – but of other companies based in their nations, and, therefore, as an unwelcome effort by the United States to expand the scope of our sanctions. As a result, such a list seriously risks alienating the very countries whose assistance we need to maintain and increase international pressure on the Bashir regime. These third countries hold important leverage that may be needed to threaten and ultimately impose additional measures against the Bashir regime, should it fail to follow through on its commitments. The promulgation of what will likely be perceived as a U.S. Government blacklist targeted at the lawful conduct of non-GOS companies based in these allied nations, however, risks shifting the focus of the debate from the Bashir government's compliance to the propriety of U.S. actions, and thus jeopardizes the international coalition that has helped bring about the recent positive developments in Sudan. Particularly in light of the current track of negotiations, including upcoming peace talks in Libya later this month, we strongly believe that requiring the promulgation of such a list is unwise.

In addition, creation of such a list raises a host of practical concerns. Any such list created by the U.S. Government will necessarily be incomplete. It would not identify those companies whose involvement in Sudan is not sufficiently established or is known only through classified information. The resultant list would be limited to publicly available information. Such a list would attempt to duplicate similar lists already compiled by non-governmental organizations based on public information but it would likely be less inclusive in light of the government's inability to rely on certain sources of information.

Further, the agency tasked with creating such a list would face difficult issues in determining what type and amount of evidence would suffice to include a company on the list. And, the inclusion or exclusion of certain companies from the list could subject the agency to legal challenges under the Administrative Procedure Act.

Creation of a list would also impose an ongoing, burdensome requirement on the agency tasked with its creation, especially a list that would need to be updated continually or on a regular basis as called for by some legislative proposals. These demands will necessarily divert resources from other important government functions. Indeed, those on my staff who have the most familiarity with Sudan are currently working to target companies and individuals for additional sanctions.

With relevant lists already available from non-governmental sources, all of the above costs would seem to greatly outweigh what incremental benefit a new government-generated list might provide.

Other Policy Proposals

Many legislative proposals would encourage and affirmatively authorize State and local government action. As noted by my State Department colleague, the Administration opposes proposals to authorize divestment by state and local governments, which impair the ability of the president to act on behalf of the nation as a whole and risk creating a multiplicity of foreign policies.

I understand that the Committee is considering alternative proposals to a government-generated list. We look forward to continuing to work with you and your staffs as you consider the costs and benefits of such proposals, and would look forward answering the Committee's questions regarding these issues.

**Conclusion**We all share the same objective when it comes to Darfur: a negotiated settlement that will bring a stable and lasting peace to Darfur. We remain committed to continuing the constructive dialogue we have had with your staffs on these important issues, as we very much want to ensure that the U.S. Government has all appropriate tools at its disposal to address this situation. Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today about this important issue.

