---
title: Treasury Warns Public About E-Mail Scams
date: 2007-12-14T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp737
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

**Washington, DC** –Treasury has become aware of phony e-mail messages claiming to come from Department officials. For example, these messages, which are unsolicited by the recipients, falsely assert that Treasury is seeking to transfer funds to the recipient of the e-mail or accuse the recipient of tax avoidance or money laundering. These e-mails may request sensitive information from the recipient, supposedly in order to process the bogus transaction.

These messages are a hoax designed to trick victims into revealing confidential information. Treasury recommends that recipients not respond to such messages.

Treasury does not send unsolicited requests and does not seek personal or financial information from members of the public by e-mail. Anyone who receives an email of this nature should file a complaint at[www.ic3.gov](http://www.ic3.gov).

E-mail users should be wary of any unsolicited messages that purport to come from U.S. Government agencies asking them to provide sensitive personal information. The transmission of phony e-mail messages requesting confidential information is a practice known as phishing. The perpetrator of a phishing scam attempts to trick the victim into revealing confidential information, which then is used for purposes of identity theft or other crimes.

Members of the public can learn more about protecting themselves from phishing and other internet-based threats at OnGuardOnline.gov, a web site created by the Department of Justice in partnership with other federal agencies and the technology industry to help stay safe online.

Anyone receiving a solicitation purporting to be from, or otherwise involving the Internal Revenue Service, may report it to the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration at:

Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration Hotline
P.O. Box 589 Ben Franklin Station
Washington, DC 20044-0589
Email: [Complaints@tigta.treas.gov](mailto:Complaints@tigta.treas.gov)
Phone: 1-800-366-4484
Fax: 202-927-7018

Solicitations purporting to be from, or otherwise involving the Department or the Secretary of the Treasury, may be reported it to the Treasury Office of Inspector General at:

Treasury Hotline
Office of Inspector General
1500 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
Washington, D.C. 20220
Email: [Hotline@oig.treas.gov](mailto:Hotline@oig.treas.gov)  
Phone: 1-800-359-3898
Fax: 202-927-5799

-30-
