---
title: Statement by Secretary Paulson on the Intent to Nominate Shulman as IRS Commissioner
date: 2007-11-21T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp693
---
*(Archived Content)*

  **Washington, DC - I am extremely pleased that the President intends to nominate Doug Shulman to be IRS Commissioner, and am grateful for Doug's willingness to serve. Doug is a highly capable executive with extensive management experience and a proven ability to provide innovative leadership to a large organization. His experience as Senior Policy Advisor and Chief of Staff on the National Commission on Restructuring the IRS provides him with fundamental knowledge of the IRS and its critical responsibility of administering the tax code. Doug is an excellent choice to lead the IRS. His energy, creativity, strong management skills, and technology experience will ensure that the IRS fully serves its mission to provide America's taxpayers top quality service by helping them understand and meet their tax responsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity and fairness.**I am extremely pleased that the President intends to nominate Doug Shulman to be IRS Commissioner, and am grateful for Doug's willingness to serve. Doug is a highly capable executive with extensive management experience and a proven ability to provide innovative leadership to a large organization. His experience as Senior Policy Advisor and Chief of Staff on the National Commission on Restructuring the IRS provides him with fundamental knowledge of the IRS and its critical responsibility of administering the tax code. Doug is an excellent choice to lead the IRS. His energy, creativity, strong management skills, and technology experience will ensure that the IRS fully serves its mission to provide America's taxpayers top quality service by helping them understand and meet their tax responsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity and fairness.**-30-**
