---
title: Treasury Updates Department Homepage
date: 2007-08-30T09:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp544
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Washington, DC-- Treasury launched an updated website this week designed to improve access to information on key issues before the Department.**

Treasury launched an updated website this week designed to improve access to information on key issues before the Department.

**New Homepage Look & Features Treasury's homepage ( www.treasury.gov) has a new look and feel including additional options for web-users to access press releases, speeches and reports on key issues before the Department. The day's top news and most recent releases will continue to be featured in the center column of the page. Information tabs on Treasury's core issues – financial markets, taxes, economy, fighting illicit finance, international affairs and coins and currency – are listed along the top of the page. Links listed in the left navigation bar were consolidated and reorganized to provide easy access to the most popular pages on the site. And key priorities for Secretary Paulson are featured in the right hand navigation bar. In the lower right-hand corner of the page is a new feature called the Secretary's Corner where all of Secretary Paulson's speeches, statements, testimony and travel updates have been consolidated.**

Treasury's homepage () has a new look and feel including additional options for web-users to access press releases, speeches and reports on key issues before the Department. The day's top news and most recent releases will continue to be featured in the center column of the page. Information tabs on Treasury's core issues – financial markets, taxes, economy, fighting illicit finance, international affairs and coins and currency – are listed along the top of the page. Links listed in the left navigation bar were consolidated and reorganized to provide easy access to the most popular pages on the site. And key priorities for Secretary Paulson are featured in the right hand navigation bar. In the lower right-hand corner of the page is a new feature called the Secretary's Corner where all of Secretary Paulson's speeches, statements, testimony and travel updates have been consolidated.

**New Email and RSS Capabilities** Treasury also recently updated its email subscription service and added RSS capability. Web users can now sign up to receive email or RSS updates on specific topics they're interested in. Options include:

- Press Releases by Topic
- Press Releases by Type (reports, speeches, testimony, etc.)
- Treasury Official Staff Updates
- Accounting and Budget Information
- Auctions
- Economic Statistics
- Interest Rate Statistics
- Health Savings Account Information
- Treasury International Capital ("TIC") Data

Please send any comments or concerns on the updated website using the redesign comment form. Feedback is appreciated.
