---
title: 'Treasury Department Names Brian O''Neill as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Western Hemisphere'
date: 2007-10-22T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp632
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Washington, D.C. – Treasury announced that Brian O'Neill joined the Office of International Affairs as the Deputy Assistant Secretary for the Western Hemisphere. O'Neill replaces Nancy Lee, who is taking an 11-month sabbatical at the Center for Global Development to work on models for regional integration. Most recently, O'Neill has served as Managing Director and Vice-Chairman, Investment Banking at JPMorgan. He joined The Chase Manhattan Bank in 1977, and has spent his career working with governments, financial institutions, and corporate clients throughout the countries of Latin America as well as Canada.** – Treasury announced that Brian O'Neill joined the Office of International Affairs as the Deputy Assistant Secretary for the Western Hemisphere. O'Neill replaces Nancy Lee, who is taking an 11-month sabbatical at the Center for Global Development to work on models for regional integration. Most recently, O'Neill has served as Managing Director and Vice-Chairman, Investment Banking at JPMorgan. He joined The Chase Manhattan Bank in 1977, and has spent his career working with governments, financial institutions, and corporate clients throughout the countries of Latin America as well as Canada.

O'Neill worked in corporate and investment banking in Chile from 1978 until 1982, in Argentina from 1983 until 1988, and in Brazil from 1989 until 1991. He returned from Sao Paulo, Brazil to New York to serve as Corporate Finance Executive for Latin America in 1991. O'Neill became Latin America Executive in 1994 and added the newly created title of Chairman in 1999. In 2001, he became Chairman of Canada and Latin America for JPMorgan. He served in the role of Managing Director and Vice-Chairman, Investment Banking beginning in 2005.

O'Neill is a Director of the Council of the Americas and of the Americas Society. He is a life member of The Council on Foreign Relations; Member of the Pacific Council on International Policy; Fellow of the Foreign Policy Association; and a member of the Advisory Committee for the David Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studies at Harvard University.

He holds a B.A. degree from the University of San Diego and a Master's degree from the American Graduate School of International Management. In 1991, he completed the Executive Program at the Amos Tuck School at Dartmouth College.

-30-
