---
title: 'UPDATE: Secretary Paulson to Visit Florida, Missouri, California to Discuss the Administration’s Efforts to Reduce Foreclosures'
date: 2007-12-14
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp734
---
*(Archived Content)*

  

Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. will travel to Orlando, Kansas City, Stockton, Calif. and Los Angeles next week to discuss the Administration's efforts to address mortgage market issues and help families struggling with their mortgage avoid foreclosure.



Paulson will meet with local officials, community leaders, and representatives from local businesses to discuss what has been proposed and what can be done to help more people. Last week Paulson joined President Bush and HUD Secretary Jackson to commend a private sector effort to streamline the refinancing and modification process and deliver quicker help to homeowners facing foreclosure. (For more information on this announcement go to:[http://www.treasury.gov/topics/financial-markets/](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/fin-mkts).)



He will also participate in an event to highlight the importance of open investment in Los Angeles on Wednesday.



The following events are open to the media:



**What**Discussion on Housing**When**Monday, December 17, 2:45 p.m. EST**Where**East Orange Community Center12050 East Colonial DriveOrlando, Fla.**Note Media should arrive by 2:30 p.m.**



***



**What**Discussion on Housing**When**Tuesday, December 18, 10:00 a.m. CST**Where**Bruce Watkins Cultural Heritage Center and Museum3700 Blue ParkwayKansas City, Mo.



***



**What **Discussion on Housing**When**Tuesday, December 18, 1:30 p.m. PST**Where**Van Buskirk Community Center734 Houston AvenueStockton, Calif.



***



**What**Roundtable on Trade**When**Wednesday, December 19, 9:30 a.m. PST**Where**World Trade CenterInvestment Room 1&21 World Trade CenterLong Beach, Calif.



-30-
