---
title: Update Three - Treasury Secretary Paulson Travels to Africa
date: 2007-11-14T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp682
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. will travel to Tanzania, South Africa, and Ghana to attend the meeting of G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors and discuss the positive economic changes taking place on the continent with government and business leaders.

Africa is experiencing its highest rates of growth and lowest levels of inflation in 30 years, prompting increasing investor interest in the continent. Secretary Paulson will use his trip to discuss the underpinnings of Africa's recent growth and explore ways in which the international financial community can further support Africa's development. Additionally, Secretary Paulson will be highlighting the importance of conservation efforts in Africa and the complementary role they play with economic growth.

The Secretary will depart on Nov. 13 and arrive in Arusha, Tanzania on Nov. 14. On Nov. 15 he will co-host with Tanzanian Finance Minister Zakia Meghji a discussion on regional financial integration with the other finance ministers of the East African Community. While in Arusha he will also visit an innovative land trust and tour a mosquito net factory.

He will then travel to Cape Town, South Africa where he will deliver remarks on Nov. 16 at the U.S.-Africa Business Summit organized by the Corporate Council on Africa. He will also attend the meeting of G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors in Kleinmond, South Africa on Nov. 17 and 18.

On Nov. 19, Secretary Paulson will be in Ghana to meet with President John Kufuor and co-host with Ghanaian Finance Minister Kwadwo Baah-Wiredu a meeting with private-sector financial leaders on financial sector development in West Africa following a tour of the Ghana Stock Exchange. Later that day he will be joined by African Development Bank President Donald Kaberuka to discuss infrastructure investment during a tour of Akosombo Dam.

The following events are open to the press:

**What ** Visit Manyara Ranch and Meet with Community Leaders ** When ** Thursday, November 15, 8:00 a.m. Local Time ** Where ** Manyara RanchArusha, Tanzania

* What **Visit Lake Manyara Primary School ** When ** Thursday, November 15, 10:00 a.m. Local Time ** Where ** Lake Manyara Primary SchoolManyara RanchArusha, Tanzania

* What **Tour A to Z Mosquito Net Factory ** When ** Thursday, November 15, 12:00 p.m. Local Time ** Where ** Unga Limited Industrial AreaArusha, Tanzania

* What **Joint Press Availability with Tanzanian Finance Minister Meghji ** When ** Thursday, November 15, 2:15 p.m. Local Time ** Where ** Arusha Coffee LodgeArusha, Tanzania

* What **Signing Ceremony for USAID Financial Support for South African Small Businesses ** When ** Friday, November 16, 2:30 p.m. Local Time ** Where ** Commodore HotelPortswood RoadPortswood SquareV&A WaterfrontCape Town, South Africa

* WHAT **Remarks to Corporate Council on Africa's U.S.-Africa Business Summit ** When ** Friday, November 16, 8:00 p.m. Local Time ** Where ** Cape Town Convention CenterConvention Square1 Lower Long StreetCape Town, South Africa

* What **Tour of Thandi Wines ** When ** Sunday, November 18, 12:15 p.m. Local Time ** Where ** R310, LynedochStellenbosch, South Africa ** What ** Tour of Ghana Stock Exchange Trading Floor and Ring Opening Bell ** When ** Monday, November 19, 9:30 a.m. Local Time ** Where ** Cedi HouseAccra, GhanaNote Open to cameras only

* What **Press Conference on OPIC Investment in Africa ** When ** Monday, November 19, 11:00 a.m. Local Time ** Where ** Cedi House, 1st FloorAccra, Ghana

* What **Tour of Akosombo Dam ** When ** Monday, November 19, 1:45 p.m. Local Time ** Where ** Akosombo DamAccra, Ghana

* What **Press Availability ** When ** Monday, November 19, 3:15 p.m. Local Time ** Where ** Volta HotelAccra, Ghana- 30 -
