---
title: Secretary Paulson to Speak This Week on U.S. - China Economic Relationship
date: 2007-04-30T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp381
---
*(Archived Content)*

Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. will speak at a conference hosted by the Peterson Institute for International Economics on Wednesday and to students at Harvard's Business School, Law School, and Kennedy School of Government in Boston on Thursday.  Secretary Paulson's remarks will focus on the importance of the U.S.-China economic relationship and both countries' efforts to strengthen that relationship through the U.S.-China Strategic Economic Dialogue. The second meeting of the SED will occur in Washington in May. The following events are opened to credentialed media: **Who** Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. **What** Remarks at the Peterson Institute for International Economics **When** Wednesday, May 2, 11 a.m. EDT **Where** Peterson Institute of International Economics1750 Massachusetts Avenue, NWC. Fred Bergsten Auditorium, 1st FloorWashington, DC **Note:** Media must pre-set by 10:45 a.m. and RSVP to Katharine Keenan at[kkeenan@petersoninstitute.org](mailto:kkeenan@petersoninstitute.org)or 202-454-1334.

 * Who  **Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr.** What **Remarks at Harvard Business School** When **Thursday, May 3, 1 p.m. EDT** Where **Harvard Business SchoolBurden AuditoriumBoston, MA** Note:**Media must RSVP to Jim Aisner (617-495-6157 or[jaisner@hbs.cedu](mailto:jaisner@hbs.cedu)) or Kerry Parke (617-495-6931 or[kparke@hbs.edu](mailto:kparke@hbs.edu)) at Harvard Business School.
