---
title: 'WEEK 11 WRAP-UP: TREASURY SENT 7.530 MILLION STIMULUS PAYMENTS THIS WEEK'
date: 2008-07-11T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp1077
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-1077

This week the Treasury Department sent out 7.530 million economic stimulus payments to American households totaling $5.755 billion.  In total, Treasury has sent out 112.405 million total economic stimulus payments totaling $91.834 billion.

This week marks the final week of mass disbursements of stimulus payments.  Payments will continue to be sent to households in small batches throughout the end of the year as returns are filed by the October 15 extension deadline.  Those Americans who do not file by October 15 and still qualify for a payment can obtain their stimulus payment by filing a 2008 tax return next year.

**Cumulative Total Total Number of Payments:** 112.405 million** Total Amount of Payments:**$91.834 billion** Week Eleven (July 7-11)**

Total Number of Payments: 7.530 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $5.755 billion

**Week Ten (June 30-July 4)**

Total Number of Payments: 10.025 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $7.775 billion

**Week Nine (June 23-27)**

Total Number of Payments: 9.674 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $7.522 billion

**Week Eight (June 16-20)**

Total Number of Payments: 9.071 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $6.919 billion

**Week Seven (June 9-13)**

Total Number of Payments: 9.526 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $7.032 billion

**Week Six (June 2-6)**

Total Number of Payments: 9.143 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $6.789 billion

**Week Five (May 26-30)**

Total Number of Payments: 5.757 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $4.320 billion

**Week Four (May 19-23)**

Total Number of Payments: 6.211 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $4.927 billion

**Week Three (May 12-16)**

Total Number of Payments: 15.575 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $13.562 billion

**Week Two (May 5-9)**

Total Number of Payments: 22.180 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $20.138 billion

**Week One (April 28-May 2)**

Total Number of Payments: 7.708 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $7.091 billion

Payments began April 28 and will continue via direct deposit or paper check through mid-July.  For a single filer, the minimum payment is generally $300 and the maximum payment is $600.  For joint filers, the minimum is generally $600 and the maximum $1,200.  There is also an additional $300 payment for each qualifying child.

For tax returns processed by the Internal Revenue Service by April 15 households will receive their payments according to the last two digits of the Social Security number on the tax form.  On a joint return, the first number listed will determine when a stimulus payment will be sent.

 

**REPORTS**

- [Direct Deposit Payments](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/document5hp1077.pdf)
