---
title: Under Secretary for International Affairs David H. McCormick Testimony before the Joint Economic Committee
date: 2008-02-13T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp823
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-823

  **Washington, D.C.-- Chairman Schumer, Vice-Chair Maloney, Ranking Member Saxton, Senator Brownback and Members of the Committee, good afternoon. I very much appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss sovereign wealth funds. This is a timely hearing on a very important topic. At Treasury, we have been increasingly focused on sovereign wealth funds for more than a year now. I am pleased to be able to share with the Committee some of our views.**Chairman Schumer, Vice-Chair Maloney, Ranking Member Saxton, Senator Brownback and Members of the Committee, good afternoon. I very much appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss sovereign wealth funds. This is a timely hearing on a very important topic. At Treasury, we have been increasingly focused on sovereign wealth funds for more than a year now. I am pleased to be able to share with the Committee some of our views.**History and Context**First, some history: sovereign wealth funds are not new. The oldest of these funds date back to the 1950s in Kuwait and Kiribati. Over the next four decades, their numbers slowly grew. Three of the largest and most respected funds – the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority, Singapore's Government Investment Corporation, and Norway's Government Pension Fund-Global – were founded in 1976, 1981, and 1990, respectively. By the year 2000, there were about 20 sovereign wealth funds worldwide managing total assets of several hundred billion dollars.

Today, what is new is the rapid increase in both the number and size of sovereign wealth funds. Twenty new funds have been created since 2000, more than half of these since 2005, which brings the total number to nearly 40 funds that now manage total assets in a range of $1.9-2.9 trillion. Private sector analysts have projected that sovereign wealth fund assets could grow to $10-15 trillion by 2015. Two trends have contributed to this ongoing growth. The first is sustained high commodity prices. The second is the accumulation of official reserves and the transfers from official reserves to investment funds in non-commodity exporters. Within this group of countries, foreign exchange reserves are now sufficient by all standard metrics of reserve adequacy. For these non-commodity exporters, more flexible exchange rates are often necessary, and Treasury actively pushes for increased flexibility(1).

So what are sovereign wealth funds? At the Department of the Treasury, we have defined them as government investment vehicles funded by foreign exchange assets, which manage those assets separately from official reserves(2). Sovereign wealth funds generally fall into two categories based on the source of the foreign exchange assets:

- Commodity funds are established through commodity exports, either owned or taxed by the government. They serve different purposes, including stabilization of fiscal revenues, intergenerational saving, and balance of payments sterilization. Given the recent extended sharp rise in commodity prices, many funds initially established for fiscal stabilization purposes have evolved into savings funds. In the case of commodity funds, foreign currency typically accrues to the government and does not increase the money supply and create unwanted inflationary pressure.
- Non-commodity funds are typically established through transfers of assets from official foreign exchange reserves. Large balance of payments surpluses have enabled non-commodity exporting countries to transfer excess foreign exchange reserves to stand-alone funds. In the case of non-commodity funds, foreign exchange assets often derive from exchange rate intervention, which then increases a country's money supply. Monetary authorities take additional steps to lower the money supply and stave off inflation by issuing new debt, but there may be a cost associated with this if the cost of the new debt is more than the returns that the government earns on its foreign exchange assets.

In contrast to traditional reserves, which are typically invested for liquidity and safety, sovereign wealth funds seek a higher rate of return and may be invested in a wider range of asset classes. Sovereign wealth fund managers have a higher risk tolerance than their counterparts managing official reserves. They emphasize expected returns over liquidity, and their investments can take the form of stakes in U.S. companies, as has been witnessed in recent months with increased regularity.

However, sovereign wealth fund assets are currently fairly concentrated. By some market estimates, a handful of funds account for the majority of total sovereign wealth fund assets. Roughly two-thirds of sovereign wealth fund assets are commodity fund assets ($1.3-1.9 trillion), while the remaining one-third are non-commodity funds transferred from official reserves ($0.6-1.0 trillion).

To get a better perspective of the relative importance of sovereign wealth funds, it is useful to consider how they measure up against private pools of global capital. Total sovereign wealth fund assets of $1.9-2.9 trillion may be small relative to a $190 trillion stock of global financial assets, or the roughly $62 trillion managed by private institutional investors. But sovereign wealth fund assets are currently larger than the total assets under management by either hedge funds or private equity funds and are set to grow at a much faster pace.

In sum, sovereign wealth funds represent a large and rapidly growing stock of government-controlled assets, invested more aggressively than traditional reserves. Attention to sovereign wealth funds is inevitable given that their rise clearly has implications for the international financial system. Sovereign wealth funds bring benefits to the system but also raise potential concerns.

**Benefits**A useful starting point when discussing the benefits of sovereign wealth funds is to stress that the United States remains committed to open investment. On May 10, 2007, President Bush publicly reaffirmed, in his Statement on Open Economies, the U.S. commitment to advancing open economies at home and abroad, including through open investment and trade. Lower trade and investment barriers benefit not only the United States, but also the global economy as a whole. The depth, liquidity and efficiency of our capital markets should continue to make the United States the most attractive country in the world in which to invest.

In 2006, there was a net increase of $2.5 trillion in foreign-owned assets in the United States, while U.S. net international investment abroad increased by $2.2 trillion. International investment in the United States fuels U.S. economic prosperity by creating well-paid jobs, importing new technology and business methods, helping to finance U.S. priorities, and providing healthy competition that fosters innovation, productivity gains, lower prices, and greater variety for consumers. Over five million Americans –4.6 percent of the U.S. private sector – are employed by foreign-owned firms' U.S. operations. Over 39 percent of these five million jobs at foreign-owned firms are in manufacturing, a sector that accounts for 13 percent of U.S. private sector jobs. These five million jobs pay 25 percent higher compensation on average than jobs at other U.S. firms. Additionally, foreign-owned firms contributed almost six percent of U.S. output and 14 percent of U.S. R&D spending in 2006. Foreign-owned firms re-invested over half of their U.S. income – $71 billion – back into the U.S. economy in 2006. A disproportionate 13 percent of U.S. tax payments and 19 percent of U.S. exports are made by foreign-owned firms. Without international investment, Americans would be faced with painful choices regarding taxes, spending on government programs, and their level of savings and consumption. Foreign investors' economic interests become more dependent on the health of the U.S. economy – giving the investor an incentive to support U.S. economic interests.

As many observers have pointed out, sovereign wealth funds have the potential to promote financial stability. They are, in principle, long term, stable investors that provide significant capital to the system. They are typically not highly leveraged and cannot be forced by capital requirements or investor withdrawals to liquidate positions rapidly. Sovereign wealth funds, as public sector entities, should have an interest in and a responsibility for financial market stability.

**Potential Concerns**Yet, sovereign wealth funds also raise potential concerns. Primary among them is a risk that sovereign wealth funds could provoke a new wave of investment protectionism, which would be very harmful to the U.S. and global economies. Protectionist sentiment could be partially based on a lack of information and understanding of sovereign wealth funds, in part due to limited transparency and clear communication on the part of the funds themselves. Concerns about the cross-border activities of state-owned enterprises may also at times be misdirected at sovereign wealth funds as a group. Better information and understanding on both sides of the investment relationship are needed.

Were protectionist pressures to lead to greater restrictions on international investment, this would weaken the United States. The United States could lose out to other countries in the competition for international investment and the benefits it brings. U.S. businesses' worldwide operations could suffer. The United States is the world's leading foreign investor. If the United States imposed new restrictions, other countries could impose restrictions on U.S. investors, jeopardizing the benefits generated in the United States by U.S. businesses that operate globally. Protectionism could raise questions about whether we have faith in the dynamism and productivity of the U.S. economy. Foreigners invest in the United States because they have faith in our future and believe our economy will provide them a good return. The United States has long welcomed international investment – and has used this capital to create new U.S.-owned businesses, expand existing businesses, and grow our economy. Protectionism could also damage the U.S. relationship with major allies such as Western Europe, Canada and Japan, which account for 90 percent of international investment in the U.S.

Second, transactions involving investment by sovereign wealth funds, as with other types of foreign investment, may raise legitimate national security concerns. The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS), which is chaired by Treasury, conducts robust reviews of certain investments that could result in foreign control of a U.S. business to identify and resolve any genuine national security concerns. The Foreign Investment and National Security Act (FINSA) became effective on October 24, 2007, and strengthened the CFIUS process. CFIUS is able to review investments from sovereign wealth funds, just as it would other foreign government-controlled investments, and it has and will continue to exercise this authority to ensure national security.

As we take our work forward on sovereign wealth funds, Treasury is also considering non-national security issues related to potential distortions from a larger role of foreign governments in markets. For example, through inefficient allocation of capital, perceived unfair competition with private firms, or the pursuit of broader strategic rather than strictly economic return-oriented investments, sovereign wealth funds could potentially distort markets. Clearly, both sovereign wealth funds and the countries in which they invest will be best served if investment decisions are made solely on commercial grounds.

Finally, sovereign wealth funds may raise concerns related to financial stability. Sovereign wealth funds can represent large, concentrated, and often non-transparent positions in certain markets and asset classes. Actual shifts in their asset allocations can cause market volatility. In fact, even perceived shifts or rumors can cause volatility as the market reacts to what it perceives sovereign wealth funds to be doing.

**Policy Response**Treasury has taken a number of steps to help ensure that the United States can continue to benefit from open investment while addressing these potential concerns.

First, we are aggressively implementing reforms that strengthen the CFIUS process, reflected in FINSA and Executive Order 11858, issued by the President on January 23. We are proceeding steadily through a vigorous drafting process for new regulations which will become effective later this Spring following public notice and comment. One of the reforms codified by FINSA, which we have already implemented, is an elevated level of accountability within CFIUS for review of foreign government-controlled transactions. I want to be clear that CFIUS reviews the investment transactions of sovereign wealth funds, based on the consideration of genuine national security concerns, just as it would for any other foreign government-controlled investment. FINSA protects our national security while keeping investment barriers low and reaffirming investor confidence and the longstanding U.S. open investment policy.

Second, we have proposed that the international community collaborate on the development of a multilateral framework for best practices. The International Monetary Fund, with support from the World Bank, should develop best practices for sovereign wealth funds, building on existing best practices for foreign exchange reserve management. These would provide guidance to new funds on how to structure themselves, reduce any potential systemic risk, and help demonstrate to critics that sovereign wealth funds can be responsible, constructive participants in the international financial system.

Third, we have proposed that the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) should identify best practices for countries that receive foreign government-controlled investment, based on its extensive work on promoting open investment regimes. These should have a focus on avoiding protectionism and should be guided by the well-established principles embraced by OECD and its members for the treatment of foreign investment.

We have already seen meaningful progress along these lines. On May 12-13 of last year, Treasury hosted a G-20 meeting of Finance Ministry and Central Bank officials on commodity cycles and financial stability, which included perhaps the first multilateral discussion of sovereign wealth funds among countries with these funds and countries in which they invest. Following a period of extensive direct bilateral outreach with sovereign wealth funds, Secretary Paulson hosted a G-7 outreach meeting on October 19, 2007 with Finance Ministers and heads of sovereign wealth funds from eight countries (China, Korea, Kuwait, Norway, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, and the United Arab Emirates) to build support for best practices.

On October 20, 2007, the International Monetary and Financial Committee – a ministerial level advisory committee to the IMF – issued a statement calling on the IMF to begin a dialogue to identify best practices for sovereign wealth funds. On November 15-16, 2007, the IMF hosted a roundtable meeting for sovereign asset and reserve managers. In response to the IMFC statement, the IMF added a special session on policy and operational issues relating to SWFs for official sector delegates. This marks the beginning of an important process in the IMF. IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn opened the roundtable meeting and underlined that some form of agreement on best practices for the operations of SWFs could help maintain an open global financial system(3). A separate dialogue is well underway in the OECD on investment policy issues with regard to SWFs, building on the discussions on Freedom of Investment, National Security, and Strategic Industries.

Fourth, Treasury has taken a number of steps internally and within the U.S. Government to enhance our understanding of sovereign wealth funds. Treasury has created a working group on sovereign wealth funds that draws on the expertise of Treasury's offices of International Affairs and Domestic Finance. Treasury's new market room is ensuring vigilant, ongoing monitoring of sovereign wealth fund trends and transactions. Through the President's Working Group on Financial Markets, chaired by Secretary Paulson, we continue to discuss and review sovereign wealth funds. We also have initiated bilateral outreach to ensure an ongoing and candid dialogue with countries with significant sovereign wealth funds and their management.

Treasury is actively coordinating with Congress through staff briefings and committee hearings. As you may know, I testified on these issues before the Senate Banking Committee in November. Also, in June and December of last year we provided Congress with updates on our sovereign wealth fund-related work in an appendix to the Report on International Economic and Exchange Rate Policies, and we will continue to provide updates on a semi-annual basis.

The Treasury Department will continue its work on sovereign wealth funds through sound analysis and focused bilateral and multilateral efforts to help ensure the United States shapes an appropriate international response to this issue, addresses legitimate areas of concern, and together with other countries, remains open to foreign investment.

(1) Russell Green and Tom Torgerson, Are High Foreign Exchange Reserves in Emerging Markets a Blessing or a Burden? Office of International Affairs Occasional Paper No. 6, U.S. Department of the Treasury, March 2007.

(2) U.S. Department of the Treasury, Sovereign Wealth Funds, Appendix 3 of the Semi-Annual Report to Congress on International Economic and Exchange Rate Policies, June 2007.

(3) IMF Convenes First Annual Roundtable of Sovereign Asset and Reserve Managers, IMF Press Release, November 16, 2007.[http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2007/pr07267.htm](http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2007/pr07267.htm)
