---
title: 'UPDATE: U.S. and China to Hold Meeting of the Strategic Economic Dialogue in China This Week'
date: 2008-12-01T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp1304
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-1304

**Washington**– Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. will lead a U.S. delegation to China this week for the meeting of the U.S.-China Strategic Economic Dialogue. The talks will take place December 4-5 in Beijing.

Secretary Paulson will be joined by Agriculture Secretary Ed Schafer, Labor Secretary Elaine Chao, Health and Human Services Secretary Mike Leavitt, Office of Management and Budget Director Jim Nussle, U.S. Trade Representative Susan Schwab, EPA Administrator Stephen Johnson, and other Administration officials.

The fifth Cabinet-level meeting of the SED will focus on strategies for managing macroeconomic risks and promoting balanced economic growth, strengthening cooperation in energy and environment, confronting the challenges to trade, promoting open investment environments, and furthering international economic cooperation. The dialogue was launched by President Bush and President Hu in September 2006.

The following events are open to media with SED credentials:

**What** Opening Statements and Introductions **When** Thursday, December 4, 2008, 8:30 a.m. Local Time **Where** Diaoyutai State GuesthouseVilla 17, Thousand Person HallBeijing **Note** Media must have SED credentials to attend. SED credentialed media must be set by 7:30 a.m.

 *

**What** Eco Partnership Signing Ceremony **When** Thursday, December 4, 2008, 5:45 p.m. Local Time **Where** Diaoyutai State GuesthouseMulti Purpose RoomBeijing **Note** This is a pooled event. Media must have SED credentials to attend. SED credentialed media must be set by 4:45 p.m.

 *

**What** Family Photo **When** Friday, December 5, 2008, 8:00 a.m. Local Time **Where** Diaoyutai State Guesthouse **Multi** Purpose RoomBeijing **Note** This is a pooled photo event. Photographers must have SED credentials to attend. SED credentialed photographers must be set by 7:00 a.m.

 *

**What** Closing Statements by Vice Premier Wang and Secretary Paulson **When** Friday, December 5, 2008, 12:05 p.m. Local Time **Where** Diaoyutai State GuesthouseMulti Purpose RoomBeijing **Note** Media must have SED credentials to attend. SED credentialed media must be set by 11:05 a.m.

 *

**What** U.S. Delegation Press Conference **When** Friday, December 5, 2008, 1:45 p.m. Local Time **Where** Grand Hyatt BeijingGrand Ballroom 11 East Chang An AvenueBeijing **Note** Media must have SED credentials to attend. SED credentialed media must be set by 1:15 p.m. **-30-**
