---
title: Treasury Designates Leadership of the IJU Terrorist Group
date: 2008-06-18
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp1035
---
*(Archived Content)*

hp-1035



**Washington - **The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated two leaders of the Islamic Jihad Union (IJU), an al Qaida-affiliated terrorist organization with the goal of overthrowing the Uzbekistan government.



Under the leadership of Jalolov and Buranov, IJU has terrorized innocents and killed civilians, said Adam J. Szubin, Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC). Today's action and the parallel action by the UN demonstrate the international community's commitment to choking off the financial lifelines supporting IJU.



Najmiddin Kamolitdinovich Jalolov and Suhayl Fatilloevich Buranov were designated today under Executive Order 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing financial, technological, or material support to terrorists or acts of terrorism. Assets the designees hold under U.S. jurisdiction are frozen and U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in transactions in property or interests in property blocked under the order.



Jalolov and Buranov were also recently added to the U.N. 1267 Sanctions Committee's Consolidated List of individuals and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, al Qaida and the Taliban. All UN member states are obligated to freeze the funds and other assets of listed individuals and entities included on the List and to apply other sanctions, including a travel ban and an arms embargo. The United States implements this asset freeze through E.O. 13224.



Historically, IJU operates principally in Central and South Asia, however as of late 2007, IJU was also operationally active in Europe. In September 2007, three IJU operatives were arrested by German authorities for plotting attacks against various public venues and possibly against U.S. military facilities in Germany. In 2004, IJU claimed responsibility for suicide attacks against Uzbekistan government offices, the U.S. and Israeli Embassies in Tashkent, and a bazaar that killed at least 47 people.



IJU, AKA the Islamic Jihad Group (IJG), was named a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) pursuant to E.O. 13224 on May 25, 2005, and added to the UN 1267 list in 2005. IJU was also designated as a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) in 2005.

**Identifier Information****NAJMIDDIN KAMOLITDINOVICH JALOLOV**

Najmiddin Kamolitdinovich Jalolov is the leader of IJU, having created the organization after leaving the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan in late 2001.



Jalolov was considered to have been a possible ringleader in the late 2007 IJU plot to conduct terrorist attacks in Germany. In late 2006, Jalolov instructed an IJU operative to case targets in Central Asia for a terrorist attack, directing him to pay close attention to certain targets including hotel complexes where visitors from Western countries stayed.



During trials related to the 2004 attacks in Tashkent, IJU members testified that Jalolov was the leader of IJU. Jalolov reportedly was one of the organizers of the terrorist acts in Uzbekistan in 2004 that killed at least 47 people.



AKAs: Nazhmiddin Kamoldinovich Zhalolov



Nazhmidin Kamoldinovich ZhalolovNazhmiddin ZhalalovNajmiddin JalalovNajmiddin JalolovNazhmiddin ZhalolovNazhmuddin Kamoldinovich ZhalolovAbu Yahya Muhammad FatihAbdurakhmonYakh'yoYahyoNajmiddin Kamilidinovich Zhanov



DOB: 1972Alt. DOB: 1 April 1972POB: Andijan region, UzbekistanAddress: S. Jalilov Street 14, Khartu, Andijan region, UzbekistanNationality: Uzbek

**SUHAYL FATILLOEVICH BURANOV**

As of late 2007, Suhayl Fatilloevich Buranov was the deputy IJU leader and was responsible for the organization's communications. As of late 2005, Buranov also prepared suicide bombers from among new IJU members. Buranov reportedly was one of the organizers of the terrorist acts in Uzbekistan in 2004 that killed at least 47 people.



AKAs: Suhail Fatilloyevich Buranov



Sukhail Fatilloevich BuranovSuhail BuranovMansur BuranovSohail MansurSuhail MansurAbu Huzaifa



DOB: 1983Alt. DOB: 11 October 1983POB: Tashkent, UzbekistanAddress: Massiv Kara-su-6, Building 12, Apartment 59, Tashkent, UzbekistanNationality: Uzbek

**-30-**
