---
title: Treasury Designates Iranian Military Firms
date: 2008-09-17T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp1145
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-1145

**Washington** - The U.S Department of the Treasury today designated six Iranian military firms that are owned or controlled by entities previously designated for their roles in Iran's nuclear and ballistic missile programs, including Iran's Ministry of Defense and Armed Forces Logistics (MODAFL) and Defense Industries Organization (DIO).

Iran attempts to shield its procurement activities behind a maze of entities, essentially hoodwinking those still doing business with Iran into facilitating illicit transactions for the transport of dual use, missile-related items, said Stuart Levey, Under Secretary for Terrorism & Financial Intelligence.

Iran Electronics Industries , Shiraz Electronics Industries , Iran Communications Industries , Iran Aircraft Manufacturing Industrial Company , Farasakht Industries, and Armament Industries Group were designated today pursuant to Executive Order 13382, an authority aimed at freezing the assets of proliferators of weapons of mass destruction and their supporters, and at isolating them from the U.S. financial and commercial systems.  Designations under E.O. 13382 are implemented by Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control and they prohibit all transactions between the designees and any U.S. person, and freeze any assets the designees may have under U.S. jurisdiction.

Treasury prepared these designations in close coordination with the Commerce Department's Bureau of Industry and Security as well as the Justice Department.  The designations complement Commerce's and Justice's criminal investigation of Iranian procurement front companies.

Iran Electronics Industries , as well as two subsidiary organizations, Shiraz Electronics Industries  and Iran Communications Industries , are being designated because they are owned or controlled by Iran's MODAFL.  MODAFL, which was designated under Executive Order 13382 on October 25, 2007, controls other previously designated entities DIO, and Aerospace Industries Organization, which is the overall manager and coordinator of Iran's missile program.

Iran Electronics Industries (IEI) offers a diversified range of military products including electro-optics and lasers, communication equipment, telecommunication security equipment, electronic warfare equipment, new and refurbished radar tubes, and missile launchers.  IEI manufactures military tactical communication systems and also electronic field telephones and switchboards.  IEI also manufactures night vision systems and laser range finders in addition to binoculars and periscopes.

Shiraz Electronics Industries is engage in the production of various electronics equipment for the Iranian military, including radars, microwave electron vacuum tubes, naval electronics, avionics and control systems, training simulators, missile guidance technology, and electronic test equipment.

Iran Communications Industries (ICI) is Iran's leading manufacturer of military and civilian communication equipment and systems.  ICI offers more than seventy-five products, including tactical communications and encryption systems that meet a wide range of the Iranian military's requirements.

Iran Aircraft Manufacturing Industrial Company (HESA) is being designated because it is owned or controlled by MODAFL, and also because it has provided support to the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC).  The IRGC, which was designated under Executive Order 13382 on October 25, 2007, is considered to be the military vanguard of Iran and has been outspoken about its willingness to proliferate ballistic missiles capable of carrying WMD.

HESA utilizes its own facilities for the inspection, maintenance, repair overhaul research, development, and manufacture of military and civilian aircraft and related military logistic systems.  HESA conducts research on, development of, production of, and flight operations for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in Iran.  The IRGC utilizes the Ababil UAV, manufactured by HESA.  HESA produces different variants of the Ababil UAV, which can be used for surveillance and attack.  Farasakht Industries is a subsidiary of HESA that specializes in the manufacturing of various aerospace tools and equipment.

Armament Industries Group is also being designated because it is owned or controlled by and acts on behalf of Iran's DIO.  Armament Industries Group is directly subordinate to DIO and is known to manufacture arms such as gun howitzers, multiple rocket launchers, sniper rifles and a variety of machine guns.  DIO was designated under Executive Order 13382 on March 30, 2007, for having engaged in activities that materially contribute to the development of Iran's nuclear and missile programs.

** Identifying Information ARMAMENT INDUSTRIES GROUP ** AKA:AIG-Armament Industries Group

Addresses:Pasdaran Ave., P.O. Box 19585/777Tehran, IranSepah Islam Road, Karaj Special Road Km 10, Iran

** FARASAKHT INDUSTRIES ** Address:P.O. Box 83145-311, Kilometer 28, Esfahan -- Tehran FreewayShahin Shahr, Esfahan, Iran ** IRAN AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIAL COMPANY ** AKAs:HESAHava Peyma Sazi-E IranHevapeimasazi;Havapeyma Sazi IranHavapeyma SazhranIran Aircraft Manufacturing IndustriesKarkhanejate Sanaye Havapaymaie IranIran Aircraft Manufacturing CompanyIAMCOIAMIHESA Trade Center

Address:P.O. Box 83145-311, 28 km Esfahan -- Tehran FreewayShahin Shahr, Esfahan, Iran

Shahih Shar Industrial Zone Isfahan, Iran

P.O. Box 81465-935, Esfahan, Iran

P.O. Box 8140, No. 107 Sepahbod Gharany Ave, Tehran, Iran

P.O. Box 14155-5568, No. 27 Shahamat Ave, Vallie Asr Sqr,Post Code 15946, Tehran, Iran

** IRAN COMMUNICATION INDUSTRIES ** AKAs:ICIIRAN COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRIES GROUPSANAYE MOKHABERAT IRAN

Addresses:P.O. Box 19295-4731, Pasdaran Avenue, Tehran, Iran

P.O. Box 19575-131, 34 Apadana Avenue, Tehran, Iran

Shahid Langari Street, Nobonyad Square Ave., Pasdaran, Tehran, Iran

** IRAN ELECTRONICS INDUSTRIES ** AKAs:IEISanaye Electronic IranSasad Iran Electronics IndustriesSherkat Sanayeh Electronics Iran

Company Registration Number:829

Addresses:P.O. Box 19575-365Shahied Langari Street, Noboniad Sq, Pasdaran Aye, Saltanad Abad, Tehran, Iran

P.O. Box 71365-1174, Hossain Abad/Ardakan Road, Shiraz, Iran

** SHIRAZ ELECTRONICS INDUSTRIES ** AKAs:Shiraz Electronic IndustriesSEI

Addresses:P.O. Box 71365-1589, Shiraz, Iran

Hossain Abad Road, Shiraz, Iran
