---
title: 'Week 1 Wrap-Up: Treasury Sent 7.708 Million Stimulus Payments This Week'
date: 2008-05-02T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp960
---
*(Archived Content)*

hp-960

 

This week the Treasury Department sent out 7.708 million economic stimulus payments to American households totaling $7.091 billion.

**Week One (April 28-May 2)**

- Total Number of Payments: 7.708 million
- Total Amount of Payments: $7.091 billion

The Treasury Department will announce at the end of every week the total number of payments that have been sent to households, and the total amount of payments sent.  Payments began April 28thand will continue via direct deposit or paper check through mid-July.  For a single filer, the minimum payment is generally $300 and the maximum payment is $600.  For joint filers, the minimum is generally $600 and the maximum $1,200.  There is also an additional $300 payment for each qualifying child.

For tax returns processed by the Internal Revenue Service by April 15households will receive their payments according to the last two digits of the Social Security number on the tax form.  On a joint return, the first number listed will determine when a stimulus payment will be sent.

**Direct Deposit Payments** If the last two digits of your Social Security number are:Your economic stimulus payment deposit should be transmitted to your bank account by:00 – 2021 – 7576 – 99May 2May 9May 16 **Paper Check** If the last two digits of your Social Security number are:Your check should be in the mail by:00 – 0910 – 1819 – 2526 – 3839 – 5152 – 6364 – 7576 – 8788 – 99May 16May 23May 30June 6June 13June 20June 27July 4July 11

A small percent of tax returns will require additional time to process and to compute a stimulus payment amount.  For these returns, stimulus payments may not be issued in accordance with the schedule above, even if the tax return was processed by April 15.  In these cases, the stimulus payment will be issued approximately 2 weeks after the tax return is ultimately processed.

**-30-**
