---
title: Paulson Statement on SEC and Federal Reserve Actions Surrounding Lehman Brothers
date: 2008-09-14T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp1134
---
*(Archived Content)*

hp-1134

Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. made the following statement today:

I strongly support the actions announced tonight by SEC Chairman Chris Cox, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and market participants. These changes will strengthen and enhance our financial markets.

These initiatives will be critical to facilitating liquid, smooth functioning markets, and addressing potential concerns in the credit markets.

I particularly appreciate the efforts of market participants who came together this weekend and initiated a set of steps to facilitate orderliness and stability in our financial markets as we work through this extraordinary environment.

Today we are looking forward. This weekend's discussions made clear that both market participants and regulators in this country and abroad recognize the need to support market stability and remove uncertainty as they address current challenges.

I am committed to working with regulators and policymakers – including Congress – to take necessary and appropriate steps to maintain the stability and orderliness of our financial markets. And I will engage with regulators and policymakers around the world to that end.

Healthy capital markets are the backbone of a vibrant U.S. economy and critical to the well-being of our economy and American families. I am confident in the resilience of our capital markets, and in the commitment of U.S. regulators and market participants to work together through this difficult period.

**  -30-**
