---
title: Statement by Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. on Resignation of Jan Boyer
date: 2008-05-20T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp991
---
*(Archived Content)*

hp-991

**Washington, DC-- Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. issued a statement today on the departure of the U.S. Alternate Executive Director of the Inter-American Development Bank Jan E. Boyer:** Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. issued a statement today on the departure of the U.S. Alternate Executive Director of the Inter-American Development Bank Jan E. Boyer:

I greatly appreciate Jan Boyer's distinguished service to the Bush Administration and the Board of Executive Directors of the Inter-American Development Bank. Jan worked with great commitment and energy to expand the presence and improve the results of the IDB while also undertaking his fiduciary duties with the utmost integrity. Jan is leaving the Administration to pursue opportunities in the private sector and I wish him and his family well, said Paulson.

Boyer assumed his duties on October 18, 2005, bringing considerable experience in developed and emerging markets. His outstanding work at the IDB ranged from supporting entrepreneurship to the development of infrastructure. In 2008, he took on the duties of Executive Director during the lead up to the 2008 IDB Annual Meeting hosted by the United States in Miami. **-30- REPORTS**

- [Resignation Letter](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/janboyer_resignation_ltr.pdf)
