---
title: 'Week 10 Wrap-Up: Treasury Sent 10.025 Million Stimulus Payments This Week'
date: 2008-07-03
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp1066
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-1066

This week the Treasury Department sent out 10.025 million economic stimulus payments to American households totaling $7.775 billion.  So far, Treasury has sent out 104.875 million total economic stimulus payments totaling $86.079 billion.

**Cumulative Total Total Number of Payments:**104.875 million** Total Amount of Payments:**$86.079 billion** Week Ten (June 30-July 4)**

Total Number of Payments: 10.025 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $7.775 billion

**Week Nine (June 23-27)**

Total Number of Payments: 9.674 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $7.522 billion

**Week Eight (June 16-20)**

Total Number of Payments: 9.071 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $6.919 billion

**Week Seven (June 9-13)**

Total Number of Payments: 9.526 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $7.032 billion

**Week Six (June 2-6)**

Total Number of Payments: 9.143 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $6.789 billion

**Week Five (May 26-30)**

Total Number of Payments: 5.757 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $4.320 billion

**Week Four (May 19-23)**

Total Number of Payments: 6.211 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $4.927 billion

**Week Three (May 12-16)**

Total Number of Payments: 15.575 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $13.562 billion

**Week Two (May 5-9)**

Total Number of Payments: 22.180 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $20.138 billion

**Week One (April 28-May 2)**

Total Number of Payments: 7.708 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $7.091 billion

The Treasury Department will announce at the end of every week the total number of payments that have been sent to households, and the total amount of payments sent.  Payments began April 28 and will continue via direct deposit or paper check through mid-July.  For a single filer, the minimum payment is generally $300 and the maximum payment is $600.  For joint filers, the minimum is generally $600 and the maximum $1,200.  There is also an additional $300 payment for each qualifying child.

For tax returns processed by the Internal Revenue Service by April 15households will receive their payments according to the last two digits of the Social Security number on the tax form.  On a joint return, the first number listed will determine when a stimulus payment will be sent.

A small percent of tax returns will require additional time to process and to compute a stimulus payment amount.  For these returns, stimulus payments may not be issued in accordance with the schedule above, even if the tax return was processed by April 15.  In these cases, the stimulus payment will be issued approximately 2 weeks after the tax return is ultimately processed.

 

- 30 -

 

**LINKS**

- [Direct Deposit Payments](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Documents/document3.pdf)
