---
title: Paulson Swears In Moy as US Mint Director
date: 2008-09-05
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp81
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

Washington, DC – U.S. Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson swore in Edmund C. Moy as 38th Director of the U.S. Mint today.

 

I want to thank President Bush and Secretary Paulson for this opportunity to join their outstanding team, Moy said. I look forward to working with my colleagues to building an even stronger, better, more efficient United States Mint.

The U.S. Senate confirmed Moy on July 26.  He previously served at the White House as Special Assistant to the President for Presidential Personnel.

Before joining the George W. Bush administration, Moy served as Senior Advisor at the Wall Street private equity firm of Welsh, Carson, Anderson and Stowe. Earlier in his career, he served in the administration of President George H.W. Bush from 1989 – 1993 as the Director of the Office of Managed Care for the Federal Health Care Financing Administration at the Department of Health and Human Services.

Moy, a Chinese-American, is active in organizations representing the Asian-American community.  The Asian Pacific American Institute for Congressional Studies honored Moy and U.S. Senator Daniel K. Inouye (D-Hawaii) in May 2006 for their contributions to the Asian Pacific American community.

Moy received his bachelor's degree in economics, international relations and political science from theUniversity of Wisconsin. Moy, his wife Karen, and daughter Nora live in the Washington, D.C. area.

The Mint generated $1.77 billion in revenues in FY 2005 and contributed $775 million to the U.S. Treasury General Fund. The agency also produced more than 15 billion coins in 2005, fulfilling the Mint's mission to produce the nation's circulating coinage for trade and commerce. To find out more log on to the Mint's website www.usmint.gov.
