---
title: 'Update: Paulson and Income Tax Credit Awareness Day'
date: 2008-01-30T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp782
---
*(Archived Content)*

Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. will join U.S. Treasurer Anna Escobedo Cabral, Acting IRS Commissioner Linda Stiff, Senator Max Baucus and Senator Charles Grassley in holding a press conference Thursday, January 31 marking EITC Awareness Day, which promotes the earned income tax credit.  This briefing will also be Web cast on the Treasury Department's website:www.treasury.gov.

The EITC is one of the government's largest cash assistance programs targeted to low-income, working Americans, and has successfully brought millions of Americans out of poverty.  Yet, nearly 1 in 4 Americans who are eligible for the credit do not claim this important benefit.

The Treasury and the IRS will promote EITC Awareness Day in conjunction with hundreds of local area partners who will be holding similar events across the country to promote the EITC and free tax preparation services for working families. For more information on the EITC, visit the IRS's website at IRS.gov.

**Who ** Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr.Treasurer Anna Escobedo CabralActing IRS Commissioner Linda StiffMargaret Roark, Chairwoman, IRS Advisory Council ** What ** Press Conference Marking EITC Awareness Day ** When ** Thursday, January 31, 10:30 a.m. EST ** Where ** Media Room (4121)Treasury Department ** Note ** Media without Treasury press credentials should contact Frances Anderson at (202) 622-2960, or[frances.anderson@do.treas.gov](mailto:frances.anderson@do.treas.gov)with the following information: full name,   Social Security number and date of birth.

This briefing will also be Web cast on the Treasury Department's website: Treasury.gov.
