---
title: Treasury Designates Gulf-Based al Qaida Financiers
date: 2008-06-05
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp1011
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-1011



**Washington**- The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated three individuals for providing financial and material support to al Qaida.



These three dangerous individuals must be stopped from further facilitating terrorism, said Stuart Levey, Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence. The global community should act swiftly to prohibit them from using the financial system and from traveling internationally.



Khalifa Muhammad Turki al-Subaiy and 'Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Jaffar 'Ali were convicted by the Bahraini High Criminal Court in January 2008 for financing terrorism, undergoing terrorist training, facilitating the travel of others abroad to receive terrorist training, and for membership in a terrorist organization. Adil Muhammad Mahmud Abd al-Khaliq was arrested in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) in January 2007 on charges of being a member of the terrorist groups al Qaida and the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group (LIFG).



These individuals were designated under Executive Order 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing financial, technological, or material support to terrorists or acts of terrorism. Any assets these designees have under U.S. jurisdiction are frozen and U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in any transactions with the designees.



**Identifying Information**



**KHALIFA MUHAMMAD TURKI AL-SUBAIY**



AKAs:Khalifa Mohd Turki AlsubaieKhalifa Mohd Turki al-SubaieKhalifa Al-SubayiKhalifa Turki bin Muhammad bin al-SuaiyCitizenship:QatariDOB:January 1, 1965Qatar Passport:00685868



Qatar Identity Card:26563400140



Khalifa Muhammad Turki al-Subaiy is a Qatar-based terrorist financier and facilitator who has provided financial support to, and acted on behalf of, al Qaida senior leadership, including senior al Qaida leader Khalid Sheikh Mohammed (KSM) prior to KSM's capture in March 2003. Al-Subaiy has provided financial support to al Qaida senior leadership in Pakistan's tribal region, and has also worked with senior al Qaida facilitators to move extremist recruits to al Qaida training camps in Pakistan. In addition, al-Subaiy has served as a diplomatic and communications conduit between al Qaida and third parties in the Middle East.



In January 2008, al-Subaiy was convicted in absentia by the Bahraini High Criminal Court for financing terrorism, undergoing terrorist training, facilitating the travel of others abroad to receive terrorist training, and for membership in a terrorist organization. He was subsequently arrested in Qatar in March 2008, where he is currently serving his sentence.



`**ABD AL-RAHMAN MUHAMMAD JAFFAR `ALl**



AKAs:`Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Jaffir`Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Jafir `AliAbd al-Rahman Jaffir AliAbdul Rahman Mohamed Jaffer AliAbdulrahman Mohammad Jaffar`Ali Al-KhalAbu Muhammad Al-KhalNationality:Bahraini



DOB:January 15, 1968POB:Muharraq, Bahrain



`Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Jaffar `Ali is a Bahrain-based al Qaida financier and facilitator who has provided significant funding to al Qaida. `Ali facilitated the movement of money to a senior al Qaida facilitator in Iran. He has also provided his personal funds for use by an al Qaida recruit.



In January 2008, `Ali was convicted by the Bahraini High Criminal Court for financing terrorism, undergoing terrorist training, facilitating the travel of others abroad to receive terrorist training, and for membership in a terrorist organization. `Ali was released shortly after the announcement of the verdict, and, with credit for time served, has completed his sentence.



**ADIL MUHAMMAD MAHMUD ABD AL-KHALIQ**



AKAs:Adel Mohamed Mahmoud Abdul KhaliqAdel Mohamed Mahmood Abdul KhaledPOB:BahrainDOB:March 2, 1984Bahraini Passport:1632207



For several years, Adil Muhammad Mahmud Abd al-Khaliq has acted for or on behalf of al Qaida senior leaders and has provided financial, material, and logistical support to al Qaida and the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group (LIFG). In 2004, Abd al-Khaliq was recruited by al Qaida to access sources of funding and to procure reliable equipment to expand al Qaida operations in Afghanistan – ultimately to carry out larger attacks there. Abd al-Khaliq also traveled to Waziristan, Pakistan, for terrorist training and to take part in jihad in Afghanistan against Coalition forces. His training included instruction in the use of AK-47 assault rifles and explosives. Abd al-Khaliq resided in al Qaida, Taliban, and LIFG safehouses during his training period.



Between 2004 and 2007, Abd al-Khaliq traveled to Iran five times on behalf of al Qaida and the LIFG for his facilitation duties. During each of these trips, he met with senior al Qaida facilitators. During this same timeframe, Abd al-Khaliq provided material support to al Qaida and the LIFG by equipping them with electrical parts used in explosives, laptop computers, jackets, GPS devices, and other equipment. Additionally, Abd al-Khaliq arranged the transportation of fighters, money, and material to LIFG camps in Pakistan.



In January 2007, Abd al-Khaliq was arrested in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) on charges of being a member of the terrorist groups al Qaida and the LIFG. Following his conviction in the UAE in late 2007, Abd al-Khaliq was transferred in early 2008 to Bahraini custody to serve out the remainder of his sentence.
