---
title: Treasury International Capital (TIC) Data for December
date: 2008-02-15T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp831
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free Adobe® Acrobat® Reader®. *

hp-831

 

Treasury International Capital (TIC) data for December are released today and posted on the U.S. Treasury web site ([www.treas.gov/tic](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic)). The next release, which will report on data for January, is scheduled for March 17, 2008.

Net foreign purchases of long-term securities were $56.5 billion.

- Net foreign purchases of long-term U.S. securities were $69.1 billion. Of this, net purchases by foreign official institutions were $35.8 billion, and net purchases by private foreign investors were $33.3 billion.
- U.S. residents purchased a net $12.6 billion of long-term foreign securities.

Net foreign acquisition of long-term securities, taking into account adjustments, is estimated to have been $45.2 billion.

Foreign holdings of dollar-denominated short-term U.S. securities, including Treasury bills, and other custody liabilities increased $34.2 billion. Foreign holdings of Treasury bills increased $15.5 billion.

Banks' own net dollar-denominated liabilities to foreign residents decreased $19.0 billion.

Monthly net TIC flows were positive $60.4 billion. Of this, net foreign private flows were positive $8.4 billion, and net foreign official flows were positive $52.1 billion.

- 30 -

**REPORTS**

- [(PDF) TIC Monthly Reports on Cross-Border Financial Flows (Billions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/hp831_ticdata.pdf)
