---
title: 'Week 7 Wrap-Up: Treasury Sent 9.526 Million Stimulus Payments This Week'
date: 2008-06-13T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp1021
---
*(Archived Content)*

hp-1021

This week the Treasury Department sent out 9.526 million economic stimulus payments to American households totaling $7.032 billion.  So far, Treasury has sent out 76.103 million total economic stimulus payments totaling $63.863 billion.

**Cumulative Total Total Number of Payments:**76.103 million**Total Amount of Payments:**$63.863 billion**Week Seven (June 9-13) Total Number of Payments**: 9.526 million**Total Amount of Payments**: $7.032 billion**Week Six (June 2-6) Total Number of Payments**: 9.143 million**Total Amount of Payments**: $6.789 billion**Week Five (May 26-30) Total Number of Payments**: 5.757 million**Total Amount of Payments:**$4.320 billion**Week Four (May 19-23) Total Number of Payments**: 6.211 million**Total Amount of Payments**: $4.927 billion**Week Three (May 12-16) Total Number of Payments**: 15.575 million**Total Amount of Payments**: $13.562 billion**Week Two (May 5-9) Total Number of Payments**: 22.180 million**Total Amount of Payments:**$20.138 billion**Week One (April 28-May 2)  Total Number of Payments:**7.708 million**Total Amount of Payments**: $7.091 billion

The Treasury Department will announce at the end of every week the total number of payments that have been sent to households, and the total amount of payments sent.  Payments began April 28 and will continue via direct deposit or paper check through mid-July.  For a single filer, the minimum payment is generally $300 and the maximum payment is $600.  For joint filers, the minimum is generally $600 and the maximum $1,200.  There is also an additional $300 payment for each qualifying child.

For tax returns processed by the Internal Revenue Service by April 15 households will receive their payments according to the last two digits of the Social Security number on the tax form.  On a joint return, the first number listed will determine when a stimulus payment will be sent.

 

**REPORTS**

- [Direct Deposit Payments](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/document10pdf.pdf)
