---
title: Treasury Targets Hizballah in Venezuela
date: 2008-06-18T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp1036
---
*(Archived Content)*

hp-1036

**Washington -** The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated two Venezuela-based supporters of Hizballah, Ghazi Nasr al Din and Fawzi Kan'an, along with two travel agencies owned and controlled by Kan'an.

It is extremely troubling to see the Government of Venezuela employing and providing safe harbor to Hizballah facilitators and fundraisers. We will continue to expose the global nature of Hizballah's terrorist support network, and we call on responsible governments worldwide to disrupt and dismantle this activity, said Adam J. Szubin, Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC).

Today's action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 13224, which targets terrorists, those owned or controlled by or acting for or on behalf of terrorists, and those providing financial, technological, or material support to terrorists or acts of terrorism. Assets the designees hold under U.S. jurisdiction are frozen and U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in transactions in property or interests in property blocked under the order.

**Identifying InformationGHAZI NASR AL DIN** Ghazi Nasr al Din is a Venezuela-based Hizballah supporter who has utilized his position as a Venezuelan diplomat and the president of a Caracas-based Shi'a Islamic Center to provide financial support to Hizballah. Nasr al Din served until recently as Charge d' Affaires at the Venezuelan Embassy in Damascus, Syria, and was subsequently appointed the Director of Political Aspects at the Venezuelan Embassy in Lebanon.

Nasr al Din has counseled Hizballah donors on fundraising efforts and has provided donors with specific information on bank accounts where the donors' deposits would go directly to Hizballah.

Ghazi Nasr al Din has met with senior Hizballah officials in Lebanon to discuss operational issues, as well as facilitated the travel of Hizballah members to and from Venezuela. In late January 2006, Nasr al Din facilitated the travel of two Hizballah representatives to the Lebanese Parliament to Caracas to solicit donations for Hizballah and to announce the opening of a Hizballah-sponsored community center and office in Venezuela. The previous year, Nasr al Din arranged the travel of Hizballah members to attend a training course in Iran.

AKAs: Haj Ghazi Nasseredine

Ghazi Nassereddine

Gazi Nasseridine

Gazi Nasser El-Din

Ghazil Nasser Al-Din

Haj Ghazzi Nassereddine

Ghassan Attef Salame Nasserddine

Ghassan Nasr El Din Ghassan

Ghazi Nasserddine

Ghazi `Atef Nasraldine

Atef Salameh Nasserdine Ghasan

Hajj Ghazi `Atif Nasr al-Din

Venezuelan Cedula: 18.190.527

Venezuelan Passport: B-0472561

DOB: 13DEC 1962

POB: Lebanon

**FAWZI KAN'AN** Fawzi Kan'an is a Venezuela-based Hizballah supporter and a significant provider of financial support to Hizballah. Kan'an has facilitated travel for Hizballah members and sent money raised in Venezuela to Hizballah officials in Lebanon.

Kan'an has met with senior Hizballah officials in Lebanon to discuss operational issues, including possible kidnappings and terrorist attacks. Further, Kan'an has also traveled with other Hizballah members to Iran for training.

  

AKAs:

Fazi Canaan

Faouzi Can'an

Fouzi Kanan

Fauzi Kanaan

Fawzi Kan'an

Fauzi Ganan

Maustaf Fawzi (Faouzi) Kanaan

DOB1:

7 June 1943

DOB 2:

February 1943

DOB3:

l June l943

POB 1:

Lebanon

POB 2:

Baalbeck, Lebanon

POB 3:

Betechelida, Lebanon

Passport no:

0877677

Nationality:

Venezuelan (Naturalized)

Naturalization no.:

2108, 16 December 1977

Identification no:

V-6.919.272

Residence 1:

Calle 2, Residencias Cosmos, Fifth Floor, Apartment 5D,La Urbina Caracas, Venezuela

Residence 2:

Esquina Bucare, Building 703, Second Floor, Apartment 20Caracas, Venezuela

**BIBLOS TRAVEL AGENCY** Biblos Travel Agency is a Venezuela-based travel agency owned and operated by Fawzi Kan'an, which he has used to courier funds to Lebanon.

 

AKAs:

Biblios TravelBiblos Travel CABiblos Travel, C.A.

Location:

Avenida Baralt, Esquina Maderero, Edificio Santa Isabel II,PB, Loc. 1 Caracas, Venezuela

**HILAL TRAVEL AGENCY** Formed in April 2001, Hilal Travel Agency is a Venezuela-based travel agency owned and operated by Fawzi Kan'an.

 

AKAs:

Hilal Travel C.A.

Address:

Avenida Baralt, Esquina Maderero, Edificio Santa IsabelCaracas, Venezuela

Business ID no.:

80074366

      **-30-**
