---
title: Treasury Department Honored for Restoration and Modernization
date: 2008-02-29
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp850
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-850

  **Washington, D.C.--The Department of the Treasury was honored today by the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) for the historic restoration and appropriate modernization of the Treasury Building. The Treasury Historical Association, an affiliated non-profit organization that educates and assists the Treasury Department with historic preservation shares the recognition.**--The Department of the Treasury was honored today by the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) for the historic restoration and appropriate modernization of the Treasury Building. The Treasury Historical Association, an affiliated non-profit organization that educates and assists the Treasury Department with historic preservation shares the recognition.

ACHP Chairman John L. Nau, III presented Treasury's Director of Facilities and Support Services James Thomas with the Chairman's Award for Federal Achievement in Historic Preservation. The ACHP is an independent federal agency that promotes the preservation, enhancement, and productive use of the nation's historic resources and advises the President and Congress on national historic preservation policy.

The Treasury Department completed a ten year, four-phase restoration and modernization project in October of 2006, the first in almost 100 years. Many of the most historic features of the building have been carefully restored and in some cases presented in ways that have not been seen since the early 1860s. During the construction project, many discoveries were made throughout the Treasury building that will become the focus of future restoration efforts. The project also allowed the Department to update the systems, infrastructure, and safety features of the building. For example, energy efficient lighting fixtures that replicate the historic fixtures were installed. A public-private partnership with the Treasury Historical Association resulted in the restoration of the decorative gilding on the Cash Room ceiling and restoration of the West Dome.

