---
title: Secretary Paulson to Attend Annual Inter-American Development Bank Meeting in Miami
date: 2008-04-02
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp901
---
*(Archived Content)*

Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. will attend the 2008 Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) annual meeting in Miami next week. The United States is hosting this year's annual meeting which is an important opportunity for high-level government and private sector representatives from Latin America and the Caribbean to discuss the work of the IDB and other financial issues facing the region. Paulson attended last year's meeting in Guatemala.

As the representative of the host country, Paulson will accept the nomination of Chairman of the Board of Governors for 2008-09. In addition to delivering opening remarks at the inaugural session, Paulson will meet with several of his counterparts from the region while in Miami.

I look forward to attending this year's meeting in Miami and thank President Moreno and the IDB for the hard work and positive impact the Bank has had in the region, said Paulson. The U.S. looks forward to continuing to work with the Bank to increase growth and reduce poverty in Latin America and the Caribbean.

The following events are open to the media:

**Who**Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr.IDB President Luis Alberto MorenoGuatemala Finance Minister Juan A. Fuentes (outgoing IDB Board of Governors Chairman)Miami Mayor Manuel Diaz**What**Inaugural Session**When**Monday, April 7, 9:30 a.m. EDT**Where**Jackie Gleason Theater1700 Washington AvenueMiami Beach, Fla.**Who**Treasury Secretary Paulson and Commerce Secretary Gutierrez**What**Joint Press Conference**When**Monday, April 7, 4:00 p.m. EDT**Where**Miami Beach Convention Center1901 Convention Center DriveMiami Beach, Fla.

For more information on the IDB's annual meeting in Miami go to:[http://www.iadb.org/](http://www.iadb.org/).
