---
title: Treasury Designates Seven Members of the Rajah Solaiman Movement
date: 2008-06-16T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp1030
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-1030

**Washington -**The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated seven members of the Rajah Solaiman Movement (RSM), a Philippines-based group that utilizes violence and terrorism with the aim of turning the Philippines into an Islamic state. The U.S. Department of State also named RSM and its leader, Ahmad Santos, as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) today.

The leader and members of the Rajah Solaiman Movement are responsible for reprehensible acts that include killing citizens and tourists in the Philippines to advance their terrorist agenda, said OFAC Director Adam J. Szubin. Today's action will make even basic operational functions more difficult for RSM and its members by increasing their isolation from the international financial system.

Along with RSM, these eight individuals were added to the U.N. 1267 Sanctions Committee's Consolidated List of individuals and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, al Qaida and the Taliban on June 4. All UN member states are obligated to freeze the funds and other assets of listed individuals and entities included on the 1267 Committee's Consolidated List and to apply other sanctions (travel ban and arms embargo). The United States implements its asset freeze through E.O. 13224, which blocks all property, and interests in property, of the designees that are in the United States, or come within the United States, or the control of U.S. persons.

RSM has assisted with the terrorist plots of the al Qaida-affiliated Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) in Manila and other areas in the northern Philippines. According to Philippine security officials and other sources, RSM members were involved in the ASG's bombing of Super Ferry 14 in February 2004 and the February 2005 Valentine's Day bombings. RSM members were involved in several plots to bomb high-profile targets, as well, including Manila public utilities, tourist areas, and the U.S. Embassy in Manila.

RSM has received training, funds, and operational assistance from the ASG and Jemaah Islamiyah (JI), two terrorist organizations previously added to the UN's Consolidated List and designated by the United States as SDGTs on September 24, 2001 and October 23, 2002, respectively. RSM, in return, has provided field operatives and a pool of potential recruits to the ASG and JI, enabling them to expand their reach into the urban areas of the Philippines.

As of 2004, RSM reportedly received funding from private Saudi sources that channeled funds through charitable NGOs in the Philippines. Between 2002 and late 2005, Saudi financiers and at least one Saudi-based Filipino financier also contributed funds to RSM for its training camps and planned terror operations.

**Identifying Information ANGELO RAMIREZ TRINIDAD**

- AKAs: Angelo Trinidad y RamirezKhalil TrinidadKhulil TrinidadAbu Khalil TrinidadCalib TrinidadKalib TrinidadAdrian Tomas
- DOB: 20 March 1978
- POB: Gattaran, Cagayan Province, the Philippines
- FORMER ADDRESS: 3111 Ma. Bautista, Punta, Santa Ana, Manila, the Philippines
- NATIONALITY: Filipino

Angelo Ramirez Trinidad is a member of RSM, and at the time of his arrest in February 2005, was also a member of an ASG operational cell in Manila.

On the orders of senior ASG figure Jainal Antel Sali, Trinidad and an accomplice conducted the February 2005 Valentine's Day bombing of a passenger bus in Manila that killed six and wounded over 100. Trinidad assembled the bomb, helped plant it on the bus and triggered it by cell phone. The ASG publicly claimed credit for this bombing. A Philippine court convicted Trinidad of the bombing in October 2005. Sali, now deceased, was named as an SDGT pursuant to E.O. 13224 on November 30, 2005 and was added to the UN's Consolidated List on December 6, 2005.

In February 2005, ASG members positively identified Trinidad as having participated with the ASG in the April 2000 kidnappings of 21 foreign tourists and Malaysian workers from Sipadan Island, Malaysia.

**PIO ABOGNE DE VERA**

- AKAs: Pio de Vera y AbognePio Abogue de VeraPio Abagne de VeraLeo M. ObogneIsmael de VeraIsmail de VeraEsmael de VeraManexTito Art
- DOB: 19 December 1969
- POB: Bagac, Bagamanok, Catanduanes Province, the Philippines
- FORMER ADDRESS: Concepcion, Zaragosa, Nueva Ecija Province, the Philippines
- NATIONALITY: Filipino

Pio Abogne de Vera is a member of the ASG. At the time of his arrest in December 2005, he was also believed to be RSM's second-in-command and its operations officer.

De Vera played an active role in an RSM plot to bomb civilian targets in Manila in 2005. He purchased and transported the explosives and scouted targets frequented by Americans and other foreign nationals. Philippine authorities disrupted this plot before its execution.

De Vera also was one of two persons tasked in 2003 with executing another aborted RSM plot to bomb several targets in Luzon, the Philippines, including telecommunications and power facilities.

**REDENDO CAIN DELLOSA**

- AKAs: Redendo Dellosa y CainRedendo Cain Jabil DellosaHakid AkmalHabil Akmad DellosaHabil Ahmad DellosaReendo Cain DellosAhmad DellosaAbu LlonggoAbu IlonggoAbu MuadzBrandon BerusaArnulfo Alvarado
- DOB: 15 May 1972
- POB: Punta, Santa Ana, Manila, the Philippines
- FORMER ADDRESS: 3111 Ma. Bautista Street, Punta, Santa Ana, Manila,the Philippines
- NATIONALITY: Filipino
- PHILIPPINE SSN: 33-3208848-3

Redendo Cain Dellosa is an RSM leader, as well as a member of the ASG. Philippine authorities arrested Dellosa in March 2004.

Dellosa allegedly led the February 2004 bombing of a passenger ferry in Manila Bay that killed over 100 people. Dellosa reportedly planted the bomb, and the ASG publicly claimed credit for the attack.

In early 2004, ASG leader Khadafi Janjalani (SDGT), now deceased, tasked Dellosa, through an associate, to devise a plan to kill Philippine Vice Presidential candidate Loren Legarda. Dellosa admitted to authorities that he had decided to place a bomb at one of her campaign stops.

Philippine authorities charged Dellosa with participation in the ASG's 2001 kidnapping of 20 people, several of whom were killed, from the Dos Palmas resort in Palawan, the Philippines. He was also reportedly implicated in the ASG kidnapping of 21 people on Sipadan Island, Malaysia, in 2000.

**FELICIANO SEMBORIO DELOS REYES, JR.**

- AKAs: Feliciano de los ReyesFeleciano Semborio Delos ReyesFeleciano Delos Reyes y SemberioFeliciano Abubakar De Los ReyesUstadz Abubakar Delos ReyesAbubakar ReyesUstadz Abubakar AbdillahAbubakar AbdillahAbdul AbdillahJorge Castro
- DOB: 04 November 1963
- POB: Arco, Lamitan, Basilan Province, the Philippines
- NATIONALITY: Filipino

Feliciano Semborio Delos Reyes, Jr. is a founding member and a senior leader of RSM. In 2006, Reyes conducted military and counterintelligence training in the Philippines for students of an ASG and JI-linked educational center.

In April 2003, Reyes reportedly joined with the ASG in planning and preparing a proposed bombing in Manila.

Reyes also participated in the February 2003 Awang airport bombing near Cotabato City, the Philippines, which killed one soldier and wounded three civilians. Philippine Government authorities arrested Reyes in December 2006.

**RICARDO PEREZ AYERAS**

- AKAs: Ricardo Abdulkarim AyerasRicardo Abdulkareem AyerasRicky AyerasAbdul Kareem AyerasAbdul Karem AyerasAbdul Karim AyerasAbdul Karim AyersKhalil AyerasIsaac Jay Galang PerezJay PerezAbdul Mujib
- DOB: 15 September 1973
- POB: 24 Paraiso Street, Barangay Poblacion, Mandaluyong City, Manila, the Philippines
- FORMER ADDRESS: 24 Paraiso Street, Barangay Poblacion, Mandaluyong City, Manila, the Philippines
- NATIONALITY: Filipino

Ricardo Perez Ayeras is a member of RSM. Philippine Government authorities arrested Ayeras in January 2007 for his role in the February 2005 Valentine's Day bombing of a passenger bus in Manila that killed six and wounded over 100.

Ayeras was also a central player in RSM's 2005 Big Bang plot to bomb civilian targets in Manila. Ayeras was to drive the bomb-laden car, staying with it as a suicide bomber, if necessary. He also helped purchase the explosives for the plot. In addition, a JI operative channeled several thousand U.S. dollars, probably destined for this same attack, through Ayeras's ATM account.

**RUBEN PESTANO LAVILLA, JR.**

- AKAs: Reuben Omar LavillaOmar LavillaReuben LavillaAhmad Omar ShariefShaykh Omar LobillaOmar LabellaReymund LavillaMile D. LavillaMike De LavillaAbdullah MuddarisRamo Lavilla
- DOB: 04 October 1972
- POB: Sitio Banga Maiti, Barangay Tranghawan, Lambunao, Iloilo Province, the Philippines
- FORMER ADDRESS: 10th Avenue, Caloocan City, Manila, the Philippines
- ALT. FORMER ADDRESS: Sitio Banga Maiti, Barangay Tranghawan, Lambunao,Iloilo Province, the Philippines
- NATIONALITY: Filipino

Ruben Pestano Lavilla, Jr. founded RSM, along with Santos and others, and is believed to have taken over as RSM's political, religious and strategic leader following Santos's 2005 arrest. Lavilla is considered RSM' s spiritual advisor.

Lavilla channeled funds to RSM from personal Arab contacts. At some point before 2003, Lavilla also personally couriered approximately US $200,000 for RSM.

Lavilla was part of the ASG-sponsored cell that carried out the February 2004 bombing of a passenger ferry in Manila Bay that killed over 100 people.

**DINNO AMOR ROSALEJOS PAREJA**

- AKAs: Dino Amor Rosalejos-ParejaDinno Rosalejos ParejaKhalil ParejaKahlil ParejaKhalil Pareja AminahJohnny Pareja
- DOB: 19 July 1981
- POB: Cebu City, Cebu Province, the Philippines
- FORMER ADDRESS: Atimonan, Quezon Province, the Philippines
- NATIONALITY: Filipino

Dinno Amor Rosalejos Pareja assumed a senior leadership role for RSM following the arrests of RSM leader Santos and RSM second-in-command De Vera in 2005.

Pareja was the key operative in the August 2005 twin bombings in Zamboanga City, the Philippines, which wounded 26 people. In November 2006, Pareja led a group in casing bombing targets in Cebu City, the Philippines, for an attack planned to coincide with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations summit. Senior ASG figure Jainal Sali, now deceased, directed Pareja to conduct this attack. Earlier, around 2004, RSM leader Santos entrusted RSM funds to Pareja.

**- 30 -**
