---
title: 'Week 2 Wrap-Up: Treasury Sent 22.180 Million Stimulus Payments This Week'
date: 2008-05-09
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp973
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free Adobe® Acrobat® Reader®. *

HP-973

 

This week the Treasury Department sent out 22.180 million economic stimulus payments to American households totaling $20.138 billion.  So far, Treasury has sent out 29.888 million total economic stimulus payments totaling $27.230 billion.

** Week Two (May 5-May9)**

Total Number of Payments: 22.180 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $20.138 billion

**Week One (April 28-May 2)**

Total Number of Payments: 7.708 millionTotal Amount of Payments: $7.091 billion

**Cumulative Total Total Number of Payments**: 29.888 million**Total Amount of Payments:**$27.230 billion

The Treasury Department will announce at the end of every week the total number of payments that have been sent to households, and the total amount of payments sent.  Payments began April 28th and will continue via direct deposit or paper check through mid-July.  For a single filer, the minimum payment is generally $300 and the maximum payment is $600.  For joint filers, the minimum is generally $600 and the maximum $1,200.  There is also an additional $300 payment for each qualifying child.

For tax returns processed by the Internal Revenue Service by April 15, households will receive their payments according to the last two digits of the Social Security number on the tax form.  On a joint return, the first number listed will determine when a stimulus payment will be sent.

     

**REPORTS**

- [Direct Deposit Payments](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Documents/document13.pdf)
