---
title: Treasury Identifies New Aliases of Al Rashid and Al-Akhtar Trusts Pakistan-Based Trusts Previously Designated for Supporting al Qaida
date: 2008-07-02
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp1065
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-1065



**Washington **- The U.S. Department of the Treasury today added to its list of Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) new aliases under which Al Rashid Trust and Al-Akhtar Trust International are operating in an apparent effort to circumvent sanctions imposed by the United States and the United Nations.



We are very concerned about designated entities reconstituting themselves under new names in attempts to circumvent sanctions and continue funneling money to terrorist activities, said Adam J. Szubin, Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC). OFAC will continue to put the public on notice when we find that a designated entity is trying to operate under the cloak of a new alias.



**Al Rashid Trust**AKA: Al Amin Welfare TrustAKA: Al Amin TrustAKA: Al Ameen TrustAKA: Al-Ameen TrustAKA: Al Madina TrustAKA: Al-Madina Trust



Al Rashid Trust was designated on September 23, 2001, in the Annex to Executive Order 13224 and was added to the UN 1267 Committee's List of individuals and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, al Qaida or the Taliban on April 24, 2002. As of mid- 2007, Al Rashid Trust was operating under the name Al Amin Welfare Trust and the other AKAs listed above.



**A1-Akhtar Trust International**AKA: Pakistan Relief FoundationAKA: Pakistani Relief FoundationAKA: Azmat-e-Pakistan TrustAKA: Azmat Pakistan Trust



Al-Akhtar Trust International was designated pursuant to E.O. 13224 on October 14, 2003, and was added to the UN 1267 Committee's List on August 17, 2005. As of July 2007, A1-Akhtar Trust International was using the alternate name Pakistan Relief Foundation and the other AKAs listed above. As of May 2007, Pakistan Relief Foundation had taken over all assets of Al-Akhtar Trust, and Al-Akhtar Trust's senior leaders had begun working on behalf of Pakistan Relief Foundation.



Al Rashid Trust, Al-Akhtar Trust International, and the AKAs named today are designated under Executive Order 13224, which targets terrorists, those owned or controlled by or acting for or on behalf of terrorists, and those providing financial, technological, or material support to terrorists or acts of terrorism. Assets these designees hold under U.S. jurisdiction are frozen and U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in transactions in property or interests in property blocked under the order.



For more information on the September 23, 2001 designation of Al Rashid Trust, please visit:[http://www.treas.gov/offices/enforcement/key-issues/protecting/charities_execorder_13224-a.shtml#trust](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/terrorist-illicit-finance/Pages/protecting-charities_execorder_13224-a#trust).



For more information on the October 14, 2003 designation of Al-Akhtar Trust International, please visit:[http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/js899.htm](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/js899).
