---
title: 'U.S. Fact Sheet: Fifth Cabinet-Level Meeting of the U.S.-China Strategic Economic Dialogue'
date: 2008-12-05T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/hp1316
---
*(Archived Content)*

HP-1316

At the fifth Cabinet-level meeting of the Strategic Economic Dialogue (SED), United States and Chinese policymakers grappled with the most significant issues in our bilateral economic relationship, including strategies for managing macroeconomic risks and promoting balanced economic growth; strengthening cooperation in energy and the environment; confronting the challenges to trade; promoting open investment environments; and furthering international economic cooperation. Cooperation to address the current global financial turmoil and economic slowdown and cooperation on key energy and environmental challenges were two areas of particular focus as 15 U.S. Cabinet officials and agency heads joined Secretary Paulson for discussions with China's Vice Premier Wang Qishan and a delegation of 21 Chinese minister and agency heads.

President George W. Bush and President Hu Jintao established the SED to create a Cabinet-level forum to develop strategies to reach shared long-term objectives while managing short-term challenges in our economic relationship. The dialogue this week in Beijing demonstrates that through the SED, the U.S. and China have built a foundation of understanding which enables frank discussion and timely resolution of differences, and enables both sides to focus on areas of shared goals where working together can increase the progress of both nations.

**International Economic Cooperation**The global economic and financial stresses require a global response. The United States welcomes recent Chinese measures to strengthen domestic demand and maintain economic growth. We welcome China's commitment to the declaration of the G-20 Summit on Financial Markets and the World Economy and the action plan to implement principles for reform, including: strengthening transparency and accountability; enhancing sound regulation; promoting integrity in financial markets; reinforcing international cooperation; and reforming international financial institutions. International financial institutions have a vital role to play in promoting global growth and stability. The U.S. therefore has supported the inclusion of China in multilateral institutions, such as the Inter-American Development Bank, as well as measures to adjust shares in the international financial institutions to better reflect the relative weight of dynamic emerging market economies in the world economy. China's accession to the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), following the May 2007 SED meeting, has led to stronger anti-money laundering regulations and greater cooperation in cutting off financing to terrorists.**Financial Sector Reform**During the fifth Cabinet-level SED in Beijing, both sides discussed market turmoil of recent months and the repricing of risk in global markets. The United States reported on steps it is taking to address market turmoil in the short-term, and intermediate-term steps to address policy issues arising from recent turmoil. The Chinese also reported on steps they are taking to open their financial services sector and further integrate into global markets.

The United States and China reached agreement on a number of issues resulting in further opening of China's financial services sector:

**Cooperation on Energy and the Environment**The United States and China announced a number of steps that enhance collaboration between the two countries to promote energy security and further environmental sustainability. Highlights include the signing of the EcoPartnership Framework, the announcement of seven separate EcoPartnerships, consensus on five action plans and the establishment of a goal for energy efficiency under the Ten Year Framework. A[Fact Sheet](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/hp1310.aspx)on Energy and Environment Accomplishments was released on December 4.**Food and Product Safety**The United States is one of the most open economies in the world. Ensuring the integrity of trade, the quality of products, and the safety of food, drugs and medical devices is a continuing priority for the United States. Americans expect that goods and products sold in our marketplace are safe, and the United States continues to take steps with all trading partners to ensure the safety and quality of these goods and products.

Both the United States and China reaffirmed the implementation and progress of existing memoranda of agreements and understanding concerning food and product safety, with the aim of enhancing cooperation and dialogue on product quality and food safety. Additionally, the two countries agreed to participate in the activities and capacity building of international organizations related to food and agricultural products.

**Trade and Investment**Advancing open investment and trade remains a key area of discussion for the SED. During a period of slowing global demand, it is especially important that both countries avoid protectionism. Open markets will speed economic recovery, and the United States and China have made joint commitments and taken joint actions to ensure that our economies remain open and competitive, including:

- [Paulson Closing Statement at the SED](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/hp1315.aspx)
- [Joint U.S.—China Fact Sheet: The Fifth U.S.—China SED](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/hp1317.aspx)
- [US and China Announce Annual Trade Finance to Assist Global Trade](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/hp1318.aspx)
