---
title: Treasury Announces $486 Million in Recovery Act Funds to Create Jobs, Provide Affordable Housing
date: 2009-07-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg203
---
*(Archived Content)*

  

TG-203



*With Funds from Fourth Award Round, More Than $1 Billion Obligated to Date under Innovative Recovery Program to Help Local Communities  *



**WASHINGTON –**As part of the Obama Administration's effort to create jobs and ease pressures on the housing market, the U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced $486 million in American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (Recovery Act) funding to spur the development of affordable housing units in Alabama, Arkansas, Connecticut, Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Montana, New Hampshire, New Mexico, the Virgin Islands, and Vermont.



Today's announcement of housing funds demonstrates how the Recovery Act is putting our nation on the path to economic stability, one community at a time, said Treasury Deputy Secretary Neal Wolin.  This initiative will help spur construction and development, create much needed jobs, and increase the availability of affordable housing for families around the country.



The labor and housing crises in this country are deeply inter-connected. Since their peak level at the beginning of 2006, housing starts have fallen almost 80 percent. Houses currently under construction are at a 13-year low, down more than 60 percent from the peak in the first quarter of 2006. This collapse has led to severe job losses in the residential building and specialty trades sector related to housing, with employment down by nearly one-third -- a loss of over one million jobs.  Such losses not only indicate significant problems in the residential construction sector, but also suggest that the need for affordable housing has risen markedly during the recession.



In response, the Treasury Department and the Department of Housing and Urban Development have been implementing new efforts designed to help families while providing important assistance to homebuilders.  Specifically, Treasury has launched an innovative program that will provide more than $3 billion from the Recovery Act to put people to work building quality, affordable housing for individuals and families affected by the current crisis.



The Treasury Department will work with state housing agencies to jump start the development or renovation of qualified affordable housing for families across the country.  Under this program, after meeting certain eligibility requirements, state housing agencies will receive funding to construct affordable housing developments.



Today, the Treasury Department is announcing the fourth round of recipients: $36 million in Alabama; $29 million in Arkansas; $34 million in Connecticut; $76 million in Georgia; $114 million in Louisiana; $44 million in Maryland; $51 million in Massachusetts; $16 in Montana;  a second round for $17 million in New Hampshire bringing the total to nearly $28 million; $38 million in New Mexico; $20 million to the Virgin Islands; and $10 million to Vermont.



The funds announced today are the fourth round in a series of awards based on a rolling application process.  The Treasury Department anticipates making similar announcements in the coming weeks.  To view the terms and conditions for the Treasury application, please click[here](https://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/recovery/Pages/LIH-grants.aspx).



**Recovery Act Awards for Affordable Housing Projects in Lieu of Housing Tax Credits **



**(in order of application submission)**



**State **



**Amount Awarded**



Kansas Housing Resources Corporation



$           23,185,466



Ohio Housing Finance Agency



$           21,250,000



Puerto Rico Housing Finance Authority



$           99,555,290



Michigan StateHousing Development Authority



$           78,310,613



WisconsinHousing & Economic Development  Authority



$           115,827,117



WashingtonFinance Housing Commission



$           10,979,349



New HampshireHousing Finance Authority



$           10,289,626  (1stround – 6/4/09)

  

$           17,423,436 (2ndround – 7/10/09)



IowaFinance Authority



$           72,772,712



Rhode IslandHousing and Mortgage Finance Corporation



$           36,811,103



Maine StateHousing Authority



$             4,142,789



IndianaHousing and Community Development Authority



$            164,011,126



MissouriHousing Development Commission



$            17,000,000



Tennessee Housing Development Agency



$            53,035,205



DC Department Housing and Community Development



$            33,770,695



ArkansasDevelopment Finance Authority



$            29,170,283



Virgin IslandsHousing Finance Authority



$            20,246,499



New MexicoMortgage Finance Authority



$            38,250,000



Vermont Housing Finance Agency



$            10,281,430



MarylandCommunity Development Administration



$            44,054,729



AlabamaHousing Finance Authority



$            36,456,058



Georgia Housing and Finance Authority



$            75,952,358



MontanaBoard of Housing



$            15,510,979



ConnecticutHousing Finance Authority



$            34,000,136



MassachusettsDept. of Housing and Community Development



$           50,814,102



Louisiana Housing Finance Agency



$         114,065,141



**Total**



** $   1,227,166,242 **



*Totals may not add due to rounding For further information on local projects, please contact: Alabama Housing Finance Authority – Barbara Wallace, (344) 244-9200 Arkansas Development Finance Authority – Derrick Rose, (501) 682-5904 Connecticut Housing Finance Authority – Christine Schilke, (860) 571-4355 Georgia Housing and Finance Authority – Kimberly King, (404) 679-0615 Louisiana Housing Finance Agency – Jeff DeGraff, (225) 763-8800 ext111 Massachusetts Dept. of Housing and Community Development – Phil Hailer, (617) 573-1104 Maryland Community Development Administration – Jacqui Lampell, (410) 514-7704 Montana Board of Housing – Bruce Brensdal, (406)841-2840 New Hampshire Housing Finance Authority – Bill Ray, (603) 472-8623 New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority – Leanne Holt, (505) 767-2254 Virgin Islands Housing Finance Authority – Janine Hector, (340) 772-4432 Vermont Housing Finance Agency – Cindy Reid (802) 652-3462    ### *
