---
title: Strategic and Economic Dialogue Press Schedule
date: 2009-07-24T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg232
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

TG-232

**WASHINGTON** – Hosted by Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, the first joint meeting of the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue will be held in Washington, D.C. from July 27-28, 2009.

The Dialogue will focus on addressing the challenges and opportunities that both countries face on a wide range of bilateral, regional and global areas of immediate and long-term strategic and economic interests. This first meeting of the Dialogue will also set the stage for intensive, ongoing and future bilateral cooperative mechanisms.

Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton will be joined for the Dialogue by their respective Chinese Co-Chairs, State Councilor Dai Bingguo and Vice Premier Wang Qishan.

Please see below for the current schedule of media opportunities. A Strategic & Economic Dialogue (S&ED) credential is required for all members of the media wishing to cover the events surrounding the S&ED – including those with Treasury, White House or Congressional press passes.   **Please note that the deadline for submitting an application for credentials has passed, and NO additional credentials will be allocated at this time. Friday, July 24, 2009  2:00 PM – 5:00 PM S&ED CREDENTIAL PICK-UP** Foreign Press CenterNational Press BuildingSuite 800529 14th St NWWashington, D.C.

Credentials must be picked up during this time; any unclaimed credentials will be forfeited. Members of the media who cannot pick up their credentials during this time must designate, via email to[Francesca.Gage@treasury.gov](mailto:Francesca.Gage@treasury.gov), a representative to pick up their credentials.  Press must present photo identification in order to pick up their S&ED press credential.

**Monday, July 27, 2009  8:30 AM S&ED FAMILY PHOTO**AtriumRonald Reagan Building and International Trade Center1300 Pennsylvania Avenue, NWWashington, D.C.

This event is open to S&ED credentialed TV and still photographers only.

**Press Entrance:**Customs and Border Patrol Entrance on 14th Street.** Pre-Set:**4:30 AM – 5:00 AM. Equipment must be dropped off during this time. Members of the media will not have access to the site from 5:00 to 7:00 AM** Press Access:**7:00 AM** Final Access:**8:00 AM** 9:00 AM – 10:00 AM S&ED OPENING CEREMONY**PRESIDENT OBAMA, SECRETARY CLINTON, SECRETARY GEITHNER, VICE PREMIER WANG, STATE COUNCILOR DAIAtrium HallRonald Reagan Building and International Trade Center1300 Pennsylvania Avenue, NWWashington, DC

This event is open to all S&ED credentialed media. **Press Entrance**: Customs and Border Patrol Entrance on 14th Street.**Pre-Set:** 4:30 AM – 5:00 AM. Equipment must be dropped off during this time. Members of the media will not have access to the site from 5:00 to 7:00 AM **Press Access:** 7:00 AM **Final Access**: 8:00 AM **1:30 PM ECONOMIC TRACK PRINCIPALS MEETING** Atrium BallroomRonald Reagan Building and International Trade Center1300 Pennsylvania Avenue, NWWashington, D.C.

This event is closed press; there will be a photo spray for S&ED credentialed TV and still photographers only at the top of the meeting.

**Tuesday, July 28, 2009  9:00 AM ECONOMIC TRACK FAMILY PHOTO**Bell EntranceU.S. Treasury Department1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NWWashington, D.C.

This event is pooled for S&ED credentialed TV and still photographers only.

**Press Entrance:**Moat entrance on the south side of the Treasury Department, adjacent to the Hamilton entrance. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. NOTE: Escorts will be provided at 7:45 and 8:15 AM.** Press Arrival:**7:30 AM - 8:15 AM** Final Access:**8:15 AM

Early arrival is strongly recommended; Treasury cannot guarantee access to late arrivals.

U.S. Pool PositionsPhoto: AP, Reuters, AFP, EPA, Getty, BloombergTV: FOX Business Network

International Pool PositionsPhoto: Xinhua, China News ServiceTV: Xinhua TV, CCTV **9:15 AM ECONOMIC TRACK OPENING SESSION** Cash RoomU.S. Treasury Department1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NWWashington, D.C.

This event is open to an expanded press pool.

**Press Entrance:**Moat entrance on the south side of the Treasury Department, adjacent to the Hamilton entrance. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. NOTE: Escorts will be provided at 7:45 and 8:15 AM.** Press Arrival:**7:30 AM - 8:15 AM** Final Access:**8:15 AM

U.S. Pool PositionsWires / Print: Open to one representative each of organizations in the Treasury Press RoomMagazine: Business WeekPhoto: AP, Reuters, AFP, EPA, Getty, BloombergTV: Bloomberg Television

International Pool PositionsPhoto: Xinhua, China News ServiceTV: Xinhua TV, CCTV

**4:45 PM U.S.-CHINA CLOSING STATEMENTS **Room 450Eisenhower Executive Office Building17th St. and Pennsylvania Ave, NWWashington, D.C.** 5:20 PM U.S. PRESS CONFERENCE **Room 450Eisenhower Executive Office Building17th St. and Pennsylvania Ave, NWWashington, D.C.** 6:00 PM CHINA PRESS CONFERENCE**Room 450Eisenhower Executive Office Building17th St. and Pennsylvania Ave, NWWashington, D.C.

Due to extremely limited space, credentials for these events have already been allocated. Access will be pooled for television.

**Press Entrance:**Northwest Gate (on Pennsylvania Avenue)** Pre-Set:**3:30 PM** Press Access**: 3:30 PM

U.S. Pool PositionsTV: NBC

International Pool PositionTV: CCTV

**7:00 PM SECRETARY GEITHNER SPEECH BEFORE U.S.-CHINA BUSINESS COUNCIL AND NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS DINNER**The Ritz-Carlton Washington (22nd Street Entrance)1150 22nd Street, NWWashington, D.C.

NOTE: A Strategic & Economic Dialogue press credential will NOT grant access to this event. Press must register separately for this event. To register, contact Ryan Fenwick at 202-326-1798 or[ryan.fenwick@edelman.com](mailto:ryan.fenwick@edelman.com)by NOON ET, Monday, July 27, 2009.

Treasury contact for planning and logistical questions only: Francesca Gage at[Francesca.Gage@treasury.gov](mailto:Francesca.Gage@treasury.gov).

For information on Strategic Track events, please visit[http://state.gov/press](http://state.gov/press).

###
