---
title: Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner to Attend G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting in Horsham, United Kingdom, March 13-14
date: 2009-02-27T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg43
---
*(Archived Content)*

February 27, 2009tg-43

**Washington, DC –**The U.S. Department of Treasury today announced that Secretary Tim Geithner will travel to Horsham, UK to attend the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting, March 13-14, 2009.  Additional details regarding Secretary Geithner's schedule will be available in the coming days.

Media requesting to travel with Secretary Geithner must send the following information to Frances Anderson in the Office of Public Affairs at[frances.anderson@treasury.gov](mailto:frances.anderson@treasury.gov): full name, news organization, passport number and country of issue.  All requests must be submitted by email. **Requests to travel with the Secretary must be received by NOON EST on Tuesday, March 3, 2009.  Space is limited, and we cannot guarantee that all requests will be granted. Travel arrangements**will be the responsibility of each media organization.  Suggested date of departure is Thursday, March 12, 2009 with a return of Sunday, March 15, 2009.  Currently, limited press opportunities are scheduled for both days of the G20 meeting, including pooled media opportunities for the arrival of the Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors to their welcome dinners on Friday, March 13 and at the top of the Ministers' and Central Bank Governors' meeting on Saturday, March 14. Secretary Geithner will hold a press conference following the meeting on March 14. Any additional media opportunities will be announced as they arise.**Hotel accommodations**for Treasury press travelers will be made through the Office of Public Affairs in conjunction with the U.S. Embassy in London; costs will be incurred by each media organization.   Please note that due to very limited availability of lodging accommodations for both staff and press at the site of the G20 meeting in Horsham, reservations for media will be made in Gatwick.  This location was chosen based on recommendation by the G20 organizers who intend to offer shuttle service for the media from this location to the G20 meeting site in Horsham.**Please include credit card information and anticipated dates of arrival and departure in your request.   Media credentials:**There are a limited number of credentials available and members of the media are encouraged to register as soon as possible.**Each member of the media must individually register for credentials**at:[http://www.livegroup.co.uk/g20press/](http://www.livegroup.co.uk/g20press/).  Please note the application deadline is**FRIDAY, MARCH 6, 2009.**

###
