---
title: Rosa Gumataotao Rios Confirmed as Treasurer of the United States
date: 2009-07-28T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg243
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

TG-243

Rosa Gumataotao Rios was confirmed on Friday by the United States Senate to serve as Treasurer of the United States.

It is a great pleasure to have Rosa Rios as Treasurer of the United States. She brings to this position extensive experience and knowledge, gained through her work in the public and private sectors, that will serve our nation well, said Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner.

Prior to her confirmation as Treasurer, Rios worked at MacFarlane Partners, where she was Managing Director of Investments. Working with MacFarlane Partners' development and global capital partners, Rios played a central role in facilitating equity transactions for large mixed-use development projects in major urban areas. Last November, Rios took a leave of absence from MacFarlane Partners to serve on the Treasury/Federal Reserve Transition Team.

Before her time at MacFarlane Partners, Rios was a Principal for Red River Associates, a consulting firm which specializes in providing development, project management and executive management services to municipalities. Rios also served as the Director of the Redevelopment and Economic Development for the City of Oakland. Also in California, Rios served as Director of Economic Development for the City of Fremont, Development Specialist for the City of San Leandro, and Manager of the Union City Redevelopment Agency. At the beginning of her career, Rios worked in San Francisco as a Commercial Property Underwriter for the General Reinsurance Corporation.

Currently, Rios is a Trustee of the Alameda County Employees' Retirement Association (ACERA) in California, and serves on the boards of the California Association of Local Economic Development (CALED), the Fruitvale Spanish-Speaking Unity Council and the Toigo Foundation. In addition, she is a Fellow with the Royal Society for the Arts.  Rios received her Bachelor's degree from Harvard University. Rios is married to Joe Gumataotao and has two children, Joey and Brooke.

###
