---
title: 'Updated: Strategic and Economic Dialogue Press Schedule for Tuesday, July 28, 2009 **Please Note New Media Access Time at Treasury**'
date: 2009-07-27
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg237
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

TG-237

**WASHINGTON** – Hosted by Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, the first joint meeting of the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue will conclude tomorrow in Washington, D.C. The Dialogue is focused on addressing the challenges and opportunities that both countries face on a wide range of bilateral, regional and global areas of immediate and long-term strategic and economic interests. This first meeting of the Dialogue will also set the stage for intensive, ongoing and future bilateral cooperative mechanisms.

Please see below for an updated schedule of media opportunities for Tuesday, July 28, 2009. A Strategic & Economic Dialogue (S&ED) credential is required for all members of the media wishing to cover the events surrounding the S&ED – including those with Treasury, White House or Congressional press passes. **Please note that the deadline for submitting an application for credentials has passed, and NO additional credentials will be allocated at this time. Tuesday, July 28, 2009 9:15 AM  ECONOMIC TRACK OPENING SESSION**Cash RoomU.S. Treasury Department1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NWWashington, D.C.

*This event is open to an expanded press pool. *

**Press Entrance:**Moat entrance on the south side of the Treasury Department, adjacent to the Hamilton entrance. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. NOTE: Escorts will be provided at 8:15 and 8:45 AM.**Press Arrival:**8:00 AM - 8:45 AM**Final Access:**8:45 AM

U.S. Pool PositionsWires / Print: Open to one representative each of organizations in the Treasury Press RoomMagazine: Business WeekPhoto: AP, Reuters, AFP, EPA, Getty, BloombergTV: Bloomberg TV, Reuters TV

International Pool PositionsPhoto: Xinhua, China News ServiceTV: Xinhua TV, CCTV

**4:45 PM U.S.-CHINA CLOSING STATEMENTS**Room 450Eisenhower Executive Office Building17th St. and Pennsylvania Ave, NWWashington, D.C.**5:20 PM U.S. PRESS CONFERENCE**Room 450Eisenhower Executive Office Building17th St. and Pennsylvania Ave, NWWashington, D.C.**6:00 PM CHINA PRESS CONFERENCE**Room 450Eisenhower Executive Office Building17th St. and Pennsylvania Ave, NWWashington, D.C.

*Due to extremely limited space, credentials for these events have already been allocated. Access will be pooled for television.* Press Entrance: **Northwest Gate (on Pennsylvania Avenue)**Pre-Set:**3:30 PM**Press Access:**3:30 PM

U.S. Pool PositionsTV: NBC

International Pool PositionTV: CCTV

**7:00 PM SECRETARY GEITHNER SPEECH BEFORE U.S.-CHINA BUSINESS COUNCIL AND NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS DINNER**The Ritz-Carlton Washington (22nd Street Entrance)1150 22nd Street, NWWashington, D.C.

NOTE: A Strategic & Economic Dialogue press credential will NOT grant access to this event. Press must register separately for this event. To register, contact Ryan Fenwick at 202-326-1798 or[ryan.fenwick@edelman.com](mailto:ryan.fenwick@edelman.com).

Treasury contact for planning and logistical questions only: Francesca Gage at[Francesca.Gage@treasury.gov](mailto:Francesca.Gage@treasury.gov).

For information on Strategic Track events, please visit[http://state.gov/press](http://state.gov/press).

###
