---
title: Treasury Awards $90 Million in Recovery Act Funding for Community Development
date: 2009-06-29
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg187
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free Adobe® Acrobat® Reader®. *



TG-187



**At Event in the Bronx, Secretary Geithner Announces Awards for Community Development Financial Institutions**



*To read biographical sketches of CDFI borrower and end beneficiary attending today's event, please visit **link**.*



**BRONX, NY**– As part of the Obama Administration's continued investment in economic development in communities around the country through the Recovery Act, Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner today announced $90 million in financial assistance awards for 59 Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) in 26 states and Puerto Rico dedicated to helping communities hard hit by the economic crisis. These awards will support new economic recovery projects in some of our nation's most vulnerable communities at a time when they are facing many financial challenges.



The Recovery Act is playing a critical role in restoring economic growth and strengthening our nation's financial stability by developing and investing in local communities, said Secretary Geithner.The Recovery Act awards announced today build on the Administration's efforts to get lenders lending again – these awards will help generate capital for small businesses, mortgage loans for homebuyers, and funding for affordable housing projects and other facilities in communities across the country.



Secretary Geithner's announcement was made today at The Point, an organization previously funded by the Nonprofit Finance Fund, a New York based CDFI and Recovery Act awardee that is receiving a $1.9 million award today.The Point is dedicated to youth development, the cultural and economic revitalization of the South Bronx, and to providing support to local entrepreneurs by helping them create new businesses and explore economic opportunities.Of the 56 awards announced today, 10 recipients are located in New York.



Said CDFI Fund Director Donna Gambrell: We are here today to not only announce the national Recovery Act awards under the CDFI Program, but to also highlight how these resources can help to transform distressed communities.The Point is a remarkable example of an organization supported by CDFI investments that is successfully bringing about the economic revitalization needed in communities around the country.



As part of the Administration's continued effort to invest directly in communities, the Treasury Department has also recently announced:


- More than $700 million in direct funding for affordable housing projects in dozens of states;
- $1.5 billion in New Markets Tax Credits to encourage private sector investments in hundreds of communities around the country;
- $13.8 billion in Build America Bonds issued to municipalities and states;
- $25 billion in direct allocations of Recovery Zone Bonds to allow cities and counties to jumpstart development projects.


The CDFI program invests in and builds the capacity of a nationwide network of community-based financial institutions with a primary mission of community development in economically distressed urban, rural, and Native communities.The CDFI Fund receives applications on an annual basis and awards funds through a competitive process.For a complete list of award recipients and profiles, visit[http://www.cdfifund.gov/](http://www.cdfifund.gov/).

  

**CDFI Program - Recovery Act Awards**

  

**Awardee Name**



**Location**



**Award Amount**



FresnoCommunity Development Financial Institution



Fresno, CA



$600,000



Northern CaliforniaCommunity Loan Fund



San Francisco, CA



$2,000,000



Low Income Investment Fund



San Francisco, CA



$2,000,000



OpportunityFund



San Jose, CA



$2,000,000



Santa CruzCommunity Credit Union



Santa Cruz, CA



$2,000,000



Rural Community Assistance Corporation



West Sacramento, CA



$2,000,000



Mendo LakeCredit Union



Ukiah, CA



$2,000,000



AtlantaMicro Fund



Atlanta, GA



$250,000



Southwest GeorgiaUnited Empowerment Zone, Inc.



Vienna, GA



$600,000



National Community Investment Fund



Chicago, IL



$2,000,000



Federation of Appalachian Housing Enterprises, Inc.



Berea, KY



$2,000,000



Mountain Association for Community Economic Development, Inc.



Berea, KY



$2,000,000



ASI Federal Credit Union



Harahan, LA



$2,000,000



LibertyFinancial Services



New Orleans, LA



$2,000,000



The Housing Partnership Network, Inc.



Boston, MA



$2,000,000



Capeand Islands Community Development, Inc.



Centreville, MA



$600,000



Western Massachusetts Enterprise Fund, Inc.



Holyoke, MA



$600,000



Springfield Neighborhood Housing Services, Inc.



Springfield, MA



$600,000



Coastal Enterprises, Inc.



Wiscasset, ME



$2,000,000



Communicating Arts Credit Union



Detroit, MI



$2,000,000



Midwest Minnesota Community Development Corporation



Detroit Lakes, MN



$2,000,000



Northland Foundation



Duluth, MN



$2,000,000



African Development Center



Minneapolis, MN



$600,000



MontanaHomeownership Network



Great Falls , MT



$600,000



Montana Community Development Corporation



Missoula, MT



$2,000,000



First Legacy Community Credit Union



Charlotte, NC



$2,000,000



Latino Community Credit Union



Durham, NC



$2,000,000



Eastern Dakota Housing Alliance, Inc.



Fargo, ND



$600,000



Midwest Housing Development Fund, Inc.



Omaha, NE



$600,000



New Hampshire Community Loan Fund, Inc.



Concord, NH



$2,000,000



Community Loan Fund of New Jersey, Inc.



Trenton, NJ



$2,000,000



New MexicoCommunity Capital



Bernalillo, NM



$600,000



BOC Capital Corp.



Brooklyn, NY



$600,000



BrooklynCooperative Federal Credit Union



Brooklyn, NY



$1,150,000



CAMBA Economic Development Corporation



Brooklyn, NY



$600,000



Leviticus 25:23 Alternative Fund, Inc.



Elmsford, NY



$2,000,000



Alternatives Federal Credit Union



Ithaca, NY



$2,000,000



Corporation for Supportive Housing



New York, NY



$2,000,000



Nonprofit Finance Fund



New York, NY



$1,900,000



Primary Care Development Corporation



New York, NY



$2,000,000



Seedco Financial Services



New York, NY



$2,000,000



Home Headquarters, Inc.



Syracuse, NY



$2,000,000



Citizen Potawatomi Community Development Corporation



Shawnee, OK



$2,000,000



Community and Shelter Assistance Corporation



Newberg, OR



$2,000,000



Albina Community Bancorp



Portland, OR



$2,000,000



Progress Fund, The



Greensburg, PA



$2,000,000



Reinvestment Fund, Inc., The



Philadelphia, PA



$2,000,000



Economic Opportunities Fund



Philadelphia, PA



$600,000



OpportunityFinance Network



Philadelphia, PA



$2,000,000



Northside Community Development Fund



Pittsburgh, PA



$600,000



Bridgeway Capital, Inc.



Pittsburgh, PA



$2,000,000



Ceiba Housing and Economic Development Corporation



Ceiba, PR



$600,000



Lowcountry Housing Trust



Charleston, SC



$600,000



Southeast Community Capital Corporation



Nashville, TN



$2,000,000



UtahMicroenterprise Loan Fund



Salt Lake City, UT



$500,000



Opportunities Credit Union



Burlington, VT



$2,000,000



Vermont Community Loan Fund, Inc.



Montpelier, VT



$2,000,000



Rutland West Neighborhood Housing Services, Inc.



West Rutland, VT



$2,000,000



Natural Capital Investment Fund, Inc.



Shepherdstown, WV



$600,000



###



Biographical sketches of the CDFI borrower and program beneficiary attending today's event:

  

**Paloma Izquierdo-Hernandez **Bronx, New York



Paloma Izquierdo-Hernandez is the President and Chief Executive Officer of Urban Health Plan (UHP), a federally qualified health center located in the South Bronx. She began her tenure at UHP in 1976 as the organization's office manager and moved through the ranks to become first the administrator, then the executive director and in 1996 she became the President and CEO.Ms. Izquierdo Hernandez has grown UHP from a one-site facility to a network of three health centers; five school health programs; four sites at facilities for at-risk populations; and two administrative facilities that house multiple grant-funded programs.Ms. Izquierdo Hernandez was raised in the Bronx, NY.She holds a masters degree in speech pathology from Columbia University's Teachers College and a master of public health from Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health.



The expansion of UHP was made possible by financing fromThe Primary Care Development Corporation(PCDC), the only Community Development Financial Institution in New York State and the largest in the country specifically investing in primary care. In 2007, U.S. Treasury awarded PCDC $40 million in New Market Tax Credits – the largest community development investment made to date in primary care. Today, PCDC will receive a $2 million Recovery Act CDFI Award; they subsequently plan to generate $20 million in new loans that will allow community health centers to expand, providing services to almost 100,000 low-income residents.

  

**Wilfredo Bio Feliciano **Bronx, New York



Wilfredo Feliciano is a founding member of Top Artistic Artists Cru (TATS CRU), Inc., a Bronx-based graphic design company. Headquartered at The Point, TATS CRU is on the forefront of mural art. In the early 1990s, Wilfredo and two of hishigh school friends -- all talented mural artists -- were struggling to get their business off the ground.  They were working out of an old Ford Bronco, had little equipment, and were relying on word of mouth to get new clients. But then they were approached by The Point who offered them a headquarters, gave them space to paint their murals and equipment to grow.TATS CRU has been hired to paint sets for Broadway plays, music videos and movies. Coca Cola, Pepsi, Kodak and McDonalds have sought them out for their unique graphic arts skills. Their revenue, at one point, reached $1 million a year.



Over the years, The Point has received critical financing from the Nonprofit Finance Fund (NFF), the only national Community Development Financial Institution to service the nonprofit sector exclusively. Today, NFF will receive a $1.9 million Recovery Act CDFI Award, which they plan to use to generate up to $10 million in additional loans and help as many as 20 small and mid-sized nonprofits expand.

    

**LINKS**


- [Read biographical sketches of CDFI borrower and end beneficiary attending today’s event](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/tg187cdfibios.pdf)
