---
title: "George W. Madison Confirmed as General Counsel"
date: 2009-09-09T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg279
---

WASHINGTON – George W. Madison was confirmed yesterday by the United States Senate to serve as the Department of the Treasury's General Counsel. As General Counsel, Madison will serve as senior legal and policy adviser to the Secretary and other senior Department officials.   Madison also will head the Treasury Legal Division and will be responsible for all legal work in the Department.

George Madison has sound judgment and exceptional legal experience. We are pleased that he is joining us as an essential member of our senior leadership and will help guide our efforts here at Treasury, said Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner.

Most recently, George W. Madison served as Executive Vice President and General Counsel of TIAA-CREF. Before joining TIAA-CREF, Madison was the former Executive Vice President, General Counsel, and Corporate Secretary at Comerica Incorporated.   Previously, he was a partner in the law firm of Mayer, Brown & Platt in New York (currently known as Mayer, Brown) and an associate of the law firm of Shearman & Sterling in New York. Madison also served as vice chairman of the Detroit Economic Growth Corporation under then Mayor of Detroit Dennis Archer and was a member of the board of trustees of the Henry Ford Health System.

Madison served as a law clerk to the Honorable Nathaniel R. Jones at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit in Cincinnati after graduating with a J.D. from Columbia Law School. He holds a B.S. from New York University's Stern School of Business and an M.B.A. from Columbia Business School.   Madison is a resident of Greenwich, Connecticut and the proud father of two daughters in college, Kristin and Jillian.

###
