---
title: Stuart Levey to Remain at Treasury as Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence
date: 2009-02-02T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg06
---
*(Archived Content)*

     

TG-06

**WASHINGTON** - U.S. Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner today announced that Stuart Levey will continue as the first Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (TFI), a role he has held since his Senate confirmation on July 21, 2004.

Stuart Levey has served with great distinction for several years as Under Secretary of the Treasury. He has led a global effort to prevent the international banking system from being used to fund terrorists and proliferation. I believe that it is in the national interest for Under Secretary Levey to continue his essential work on a number of the most important policy challenges facing the country and am gratified that he has agreed to serve as a senior member of the Obama administration, said Secretary Geithner.

Prior to Secretary Geithner's swearing-in, Levey was acting Secretary of the Treasury.  He returned to his duties as Under Secretary for TFI Monday evening.

As Under Secretary, Levey leads an office that marshals the Treasury Department's policy, enforcement, regulatory and intelligence functions to sever the lines of financial support to international terrorists, WMD proliferators, narcotics traffickers and other threats to our national security.  In this capacity he oversees the Office of Terrorist Finance and Financial Crime (TFFC), the Office of Intelligence and Analysis (OIA), the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) and the Treasury Executive Office of Asset Forfeiture (TEOAF).

###
