---
title: Treasury International Capital Data For September
date: 2009-11-17T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/20091117830122729
---
*(Archived Content)*

2009-11-17-8-30-12-2729

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today released Treasury International Capital (TIC) data for September 2009. The next release, which will report on data for October 2009, is scheduled for December 15, 2009.

Net foreign purchases of long-term securities were $40.7 billion.

- Net foreign purchases of long-term U.S. securities were $55.7 billion. Of this, net purchases by private foreign investors were $44.8 billion, and net purchases by foreign official institutions were $10.9 billion.
- U.S. residents purchased a net $15.0 billion of long-term foreign securities.

Net foreign acquisition of long-term securities, taking into account adjustments, is estimated to have been $31.7 billion.

Foreign holdings of dollar-denominated short-termU.S.securities, including Treasury bills, and other custody liabilities decreased $11.8 billion. Foreign holdings of Treasury bills decreased $0.3 billion.

Banks' own net dollar-denominated liabilities to foreign residents increased $113.7 billion.

Monthly net TIC flowswere $133.5 billion. Of this, net foreign private flows were $148.1 billion, and net foreign official flows were negative $14.6 billion.

Complete data are available on the Treasury website at[www.treas.gov/tic](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic).

Note: Beginning with the press release of September 16, 2009, the data for lines 22-32, and especially line 29, include data from a number of institutions previously reporting only quarterly as nonbanks, but which are now reporting monthly as banking entities. This change in reporter classification affects data going back to October 2008.
