---
title: Treasury Targets Al Qaida and Lashkar-E Tayyiba Networks in Pakistan
date: 2009-07-01T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg192
---
*(Archived Content)*

TG-192

 

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today targeted the support networks of al Qaida and Lashkar-e Tayyiba (LET) in Pakistan by designating four individuals, Fazeel-A-Tul Shaykh Abu Mohammed Ameen Al-Peshawari, Arif Qasmani, Mohammed Yahya Mujahid, and Nasir Javaid, under Executive Order 13224.The designated individuals have provided direct support to al Qaida and LET and have facilitated terrorist attacks, including the July 2006 train bombing in Mumbai, India.

LET is a Pakistan-based terrorist group with links to Usama bin Ladin and the al Qaida network, and was designated pursuant to U.S. Executive Order 13224 on December 20,

2001, and under UN Security Council Resolution 1267 on May 2, 2005.  The U.S. Department of State named LET a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) on December 26, 2001.

The United States and the United Nations have both targeted these four individuals for supporting al Qaida and Lashkar-e Tayyiba, said OFAC Director Adam J. Szubin. Threats to global security require a global response, and we are gratified to be standing shoulder to shoulder with the UN Security Council as we cut these terrorist supporters off from the international financial system.

On June 29, 2009, Fazeel-A-Tul Shaykh Abu Mohammed Ameen Al-Peshawari, Arif Qasmani, and Mohammed Yahya Mujahid were added to the UN 1267 Sanctions Committee's Consolidated List of individuals and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, al Qaida, and the Taliban.All UN member states are obligated to freeze the funds and other assets of listed individuals and entities included on the 1267 Committee's Consolidated List and to apply other sanctions (travel ban and arms embargo). The United States implements its asset freeze through E.O. 13224, which blocks all property and interests in property of the designees that are in the United States or come within the United Statesor the control of U.S. persons.

As of early 2008, Fazeel-A-Tul Shaykh Abu Mohammed Ameen Al-Peshawari (Ameen al-Peshawari) was providing assistance, including funding and recruits, to the al Qaida network. He has also provided funding and other resources to the Taliban, including explosive vests and other resources and actively facilitated the activities of anti-Coalition militants operating in Afghanistan by raising money in support of terrorist activities. In addition, he had begun a campaign to support militants in Pakistan. As of 2007, Ameen al-Peshawari was responsible for recruiting fighters and suicide bombers and for the acquisition of funds and equipment for militants in Afghanistan. Ameen al-Peshawari has also provided monetary compensation to families of fighters killed in Afghanistan and has been involved in anti-Coalition militia recruiting activities.

Arif Qasmani is the chief coordinator for Lashkar-e Tayyiba's (LET) dealings with outside organizations and has provided significant support for LET terrorist operations. Qasmani has worked with LET to facilitate terrorist attacks, including the July 2006 train bombing in Mumbai, India, and the February 2007 Samjota Express bombing in Panipat, India.Qasmani conducted fundraising activities on behalf of LET in 2005 and utilized money that he received from Dawood Ibrahim, an Indian crime figure and terrorist supporter, to facilitate the July 2006 train bombing in Mumbai, India.

Since 2001, Arif Qasmani has also provided financial and other support and services to al Qaida, including facilitating the movement of al Qaida leaders and personnel in and out of Afghanistan, the return of foreign fighters to their respective countries, and the provision of supplies and weapons. In return for Qasmani's support, al Qaida provided Qasmani with operatives to support the July 2006 train bombing in Mumbai, India, and the February 2007 Samjota Express bombing in Panipat, India. In 2005, Qasmani provided Taliban leaders with a safe haven and a means to smuggle personnel, equipment, and weapons into Afghanistan.

Mohammed Yahya Mujahid is the head of the LET media department and has served as an LET media spokesman since at least mid-2001. In that capacity, Mujahid has issued statements to the press on behalf of LET on numerous occasions, including after the December 2001 LET attacks on the Indian Parliament, and following the November 2008 attacks in Mumbai, India. Mujahid's statements on behalf of LET have been reported by international news sources such as BBC News, the New York Times, the International Herald Tribune, and Asia Times Online. As of late 2007, Mujahid was influential among the LET central leadership.

Nasir Javaid is an LET official involved in LET operations and has served as an LET commander in Pakistan. From 2001 to at least 2008, Nasir Javaid was also involved in LET military training. In mid-2001, Javaid assumed command of an LET training center in Pakistan.

 

Identifying Information:

** FAZEEL-A-TUL SHAYKH ABU MOHAMMED AMEEN AL-PESHAWARI ** AKAs:Shaykh AminullahSheik AminullahShaykh AmeenAbu Mohammad Aminullah PeshawariShaykh Aminullah al-PeshawariAbu Mohammad Amin BishawriAbu Mohammad Shaykh Aminullah al BishauriShaykh Abu Mohammed Ameen al-PeshawariDOB:Circa 1967Alt. DOB:Circa 1961Alt. DOB:Circa 1973POB:Konar Province, AfghanistanAddress:Ganj District, Peshawar, Pakistan ** ARIF QASMANI ** AKAs:Muhammad Arif QasmaniMuhammad 'Arif QasmaniMohammad Arif QasmaniQasmani BabaArif UmerMemon BabaBaba JiDOB:Circa 1944Address:House Number 136, KDA Scheme No. 1,Tipu Sultan Road, Karachi, PakistanNationality:Pakistani ** MOHAMMED YAHYA MUJAHID ** AKAs:Mohammad Yahya AzizYahya MujahidDOB:March 12, 1961POB:Lahore, Punjab Province, PakistanNational ID Card No.: Pakistan, 35404-1577309-9 ** NASIR JAVAID ** AKAs:Naser JavedNasir JavedNasser JavidAbu IshmaelHaji Nasir JavedNasar JavedQari Naser JavedDOB:Circa 1956Alt. DOB:Circa 1958Alt. DOB:Circa 1965POB:PakistanFROM:Gujranwala, Punjab province, PakistanAddress:Mansehra district, Northwest FrontierProvince, PakistanNationality:Pakistani

###
