---
title: Treasury International Capital (TIC) Data for June
date: 2009-08-17T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg263
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today released Treasury International Capital (TIC) data for June 2009. The next release, which will report on data for July 2009, is scheduled for September 16, 2009.

Net foreign purchases of long-term securities were $90.7 billion.

- Net foreign purchases of long-term U.S. securities were $123.6 billion. Of this, net purchases by private foreign investors were $105.2 billion, and net purchases by foreign official institutions were $18.4 billion.
- U.S. residents purchased a net $32.9 billion of long-term foreign securities.

Net foreign acquisition of long-term securities, taking into account adjustments, is estimated to have been $71.3 billion.

Foreign holdings of dollar-denominated short-termU.S.securities, including Treasury bills, and other custody liabilities decreased $19.5 billion. Foreign holdings of Treasury bills decreased $11.3 billion.

Banks' own net dollar-denominated liabilities to foreign residents decreased $82.9 billion.

Monthly net TIC flowswere negative $31.2 billion. Of this, net foreign private flows were negative $27.7 billion, and net foreign official flows were negative $3.5 billion.

Complete data are available on the Treasury website at[www.treas.gov/tic](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic).

###

 

** REPORTS**

- [(PDF) TIC Monthly Reports on Cross-Border Financial Flows (Billions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/tg263_ticdata.pdf)
