---
title: TREASURY INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL DATA FOR JULY
date: 2009-09-26
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg288
---
*(Archived Content)*

​**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today released Treasury International Capital (TIC) data for July 2009. The next release, which will report on data for August 2009, is scheduled for October 16, 2009. Net foreign purchases of long-term securities were $15.3 billion. 
- Net foreign purchases of long-term U.S. securities were $44.0 billion. Of this, net purchases by private foreign investors were $32.1 billion, and net purchases by foreign official institutions were $12.0 billion.
- U.S. residents purchased a net $28.8 billion of long-term foreign securities.
Net foreign acquisition of long-term securities, taking into account adjustments, is estimated to have been negative $7.4 billion.   Foreign holdings of dollar-denominated short-term U.S. securities, including Treasury bills, and other custody liabilities decreased $4.5 billion. Foreign holdings of Treasury bills increased $14.4 billion.   Banks' own net dollar-denominated liabilities to foreign residents decreased $85.7 billion.   Monthly net TIC flows were negative $97.5 billion. Of this, net foreign private flows were negative $131.3 billion, and net foreign official flows were $33.8 billion. Complete data are available on the Treasury website at [www.treas.gov/tic](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic)   Note: The data for lines 22-32, and especially line 29, include data from a number of institutions previously reporting only quarterly as nonbanks, but which are now reporting monthly as banking entities. This change in reporter classification affects data going back to October 2008.   **REPORTS** 
- [TIC Monthly Reports on Cross-Border Financial Flows(Billions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/tictable.pdf)
