---
title: 'Treasury Targets Key al-Qa''ida in Iraq Operative'
date: 2009-05-14
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg132
---
*(Archived Content)*

  

TG-132



**WASHINGTON**-- The U.S. Department of the Treasury today targeted the support network of al-Qa'ida in Iraq (AQI) by designating Syria-based Sa'ad Uwayyid 'Ubayd Mu'jil al Shammari (aka Abu Khalaf) under Executive Order 13224.  E.O. 13224 targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  AQI is a Terrorist Organization and a Specially Designated Global Terrorist.



We will continue to aggressively implement the international obligation to target al-Qa'ida-linked terrorists, like Abu Khalaf, who threaten the safety of Coalition Forces and the stability of Iraq, said Stuart Levey, Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.



Abu Khalaf acts for or on behalf of AQI by serving as a seniorleaderof AQI's Syria-based facilitation network.  As of early January 2009, Abu Khalaf was in charge of the foreign fighter facilitation network formerly headed by Badran Turki Hishan Al-Mazidih (aka Abu Ghadiyah).  Treasury designated Abu Ghadiyah in February 2008 for running a Syria-based AQI facilitation network that controlled the flow of money, weapons, terrorists and other resources through Syria to AQI.  Previously, Abu Khalaf was reportedly second in charge of the Islamic State of Iraq in Syria, a group formed by AQI that has claimed responsibility for mass kidnappings and a series of major attacks.



As of fall 2008, Abu Khalaf and an AQI member involved with foreign fighter facilitation transported terrorists from Syria to Iraq.  In one instance,   Abu Khalaf directed an AQI facilitator to recruit young North Africans for AQI.  The facilitator recruited a few suicide bombers, who attempted to travel to Iraq.  Abu Khalaf was also likely involved in facilitating the travel of a number of suicide operatives to the Levant region from Gulf-based extremist networks.  Separately, Abu Khalaf facilitated the transfer of equipment from Abu Ghadiyah to Iraq-based AQI networks.



Under E.O. 13224, any assets in which this individual has an interest are frozen, and U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in any transactions with him



**SA'AD UWAYYID 'UBAYD MU'JIL AL-SHAMMARI**



AKAsAbu KhalafSaad Owaied ObaidSa'ad Al-ShammariAbu Hammudi Al-Shammari



Date of BirthJuly 3, 1972Place of BirthTal Wardan, Ninevah, IraqAlt. Place of BirthTal Afar, Ninevah, IraqLocationsTal Hamis, Syria'Awinat Village, Rabi'ah District, IraqTal Wardan, Iraq



###
