---
title: 'Support Under the Homeowner Affordability and Stability Plan: Three Cases'
date: 2009-02-18
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/2009218943276747
---
*(Archived Content)*



2009-2-18-9-43-27-6747



**Family A: Access to Refinancing**



******In 2006:**Family A took a 30-year fixed rate mortgage of $207,000 on a house worth $260,000 at the time. (The family put just over 20% down.) They received a Fannie Mae conforming loan with an interest rate of 6.50%.


- **Today:**Family A has about $200,000 remaining on their mortgage but their home value has fallen 15 percent to $221,000.Their loan-to-value ratio is now 90%,**making them ineligible for a Fannie Mae refinancing.**
- **Under the Refinancing Plan: **Family A can refinance to a rate of 5.16%.**This would reduce their annual payments by nearly $2,350.**
    

**Existing Mortgage**



**Refinancing**



Balance



$199,584



$203,575



Remaining Years



27



30



Interest Rate



6.50%



5.16%



Monthly Payment



$1,308



$1,113



Savings



**$196 per month, $2,347 per year**



**Family B: Access to Refinancing**



**In 2006:**Family B took a 30-year fixed rate mortgage of $350,000 on a house worth $475,000 at the time. (The family put just over 26% down.) They received a Fannie Mae conforming loan with an interest rate of 6.50%.


- **Today:**Family B has about $337,460 remaining on their mortgage but their home value has fallen to $400,000.Their loan-to-value ratio is now 84%,**making them ineligible for a Fannie Mae refinancing.**
- **Under the Refinancing Plan: **Family B can refinance to a rate of 5.16%.**This would reduce their annual payments by nearly $4,000.**
    

**Existing Mortgage**



**Refinancing**



Balance



$337,460



$344,210



Remaining Years



27



30



Interest Rate



6.50%



5.16%



Monthly Payment



$2,212



$1,882



Savings



**$331 per month, $3,968 per year**

  

**Family C: Eligible for Homeowner Stability Initiative**



**In 2006**: Family C took out a 30-year subprime mortgage of $220,000, on a house worth $230,000 at the time (they put less than 5% down). Their mortgage broker – Mom & Pop Mortgage – sold their loan to Investment Bank. The interest rate on their mortgage is 7.5%.


- **Today**: Family C has $214,016 remaining on their mortgage but their home value has fallen -18% to $189,000. Also, in November, one parent in Family C was moved from full-time to part-time work, causing a significant negative shock to their income.
- **Under the Homeowner Stability Initiative: **Family C can get a government sponsored modification that – for five years – will reduce their mortgage payment by $406 a month. After those five years, Family C's mortgage payment will adjust upward at a moderate, phased-in level.
    

**Existing Mortgage**



**Loan Modification**



**Balance**



$213,431



$213,431



**Remaining Years**



27



27



**Interest Rate**



7.50%



4.42%



**Monthly Payment**



$1,538



$1,132



**Savings:**



**$406 per month, $4,870 per year****



**Homeowner Stability Initiative: How the   Program Works for the Lender, Government and Borrower **


- First, Investment Bank (working through a mortgage servicer)**reduces the interest rate so that the Family C's monthly debt-to-income ratio drops**from 42% to 38%. This means that Investment Bank must reduce the interest rate from 7.50% to 6.38%, bringing down Family C's monthly payment from$1,538to$1,387.
- Second, the government and Investment Bank**share the cost of further reducing the interest rate**so that the Family C's monthly debt-to-income level is lowered to 31%. Any dollar the bank spends is matched by the government. At this stage, Family C's interest rate is reduced from 6.41% to 4.43%.In total, Family C's monthly payment has fallen from $1,538to$1,132.
- If Family C remains current on their payments, they will receive**incentive payments**up to $1,000 a year, or $5,000 over five years, that would go towards reducing the principal they owe. Additionally, the mortgage servicer can earn an up-front incentive fee of $1,000, plus up to $1,000 per year in Pay for Success fees for three years, so long as Family C remains current.
****
