---
title: Alan Krueger Confirmed as Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy
date: 2009-05-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg124
---
*(Archived Content)*

  

TG-124



WASHINGTON-- Alan Krueger was confirmed last night by the United States Senate today to serve as the Department of the Treasury's Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy.  As Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy,Krueger is responsible for the review and analysis of both domestic and international economic issues and developments in the financial markets. Additionally, Krueger assists in the Secretary's role of Managing Trustee of the Social Security and Medicare Trusts.  Krueger has also been given the title Chief Economist of the Treasury Department.In these roles, Krueger willbe a key player in the Obama Administration's economic recovery efforts.



I am pleased to welcome Alan to the Treasury Department and am confident that his wealth of experience will enable him to make invaluable contributions to our nation's economic recovery, said Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner.



Alan Krueger is the Bendheim Professor of Economics and Public Affairs at Princeton University, where he has held a joint appointment in the Economics Department and Woodrow Wilson School since 1987.In 1994-95 Mr. Krueger served as Chief Economist at the U.S. Department of Labor. Mr. Krueger has published widely on the economics of education, unemployment, income distribution, social insurance, regulation, terrorism and theenvironment. He is a Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research, a member of the editorial board of*Science*, and serves as chief economist for the Council for Economic Education.  Krueger is also a member of the AmericanAcademy of Arts and Science and a member of the Econometric Society.



Krueger received his Ph.D. from HarvardUniversity in 1987, an A.M. in Economics from HarvardUniversity in 1985, and a B.S. degree (with honors) from CornellUniversity's School of Industrial & Labor Relations in 1983. He is married to Lisa Simon Krueger and has two teenage children, Benjamin and Sydney.



###
