---
title: Treasury Announces Income Tax Treaty with Italy
date: 2009-12-16T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg454
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

TG-454

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the long awaited entry into force of an income tax treaty with Italy. Originally approved by the U.S. Senate in 1999, the treaty officially entered into force this morning when representatives of the two governments exchanged ratification documents at an event in Rome, Italy.

Provisions of the new tax treaty with Italy include:

- A limit of 5 percent on source-country withholding tax on certain direct dividends and a limit of 15 percent on source-country withholding tax all other dividends.
- Elimination of source-country withholding tax on certain interest paid to, guaranteed or insured by qualified governmental entities; interest paid with respect to a sale on credit of goods, merchandise, services or industrial, commercial or scientific equipment; and a limit of 10 percent source-country on withholding tax on all other interest.
- Elimination of source-country withholding tax on royalties for certain literary, artistic or scientific works; a limit of 5 percent source-country withholding tax on royalties for the use of, or the right to use, computer software or industrial, commercial or scientific equipment; and a limit of 8 percent source-country withholding tax on all other royalties.
- A comprehensive limitation on benefits provision.

With respect to taxes withheld at source, the new treaty shall have effect for amounts paid or credited on or after February 1, 2010.  For all other taxes, the new treaty will cover taxable years starting January 1, 2010.

**###**
