---
title: Treasury Provides Funding to Bolster 42 Healthy, Local Banks Nationwide; First banks in Arizona and Nebraska receive capital to increase lending; Banks in 45 states now participating in Treasury program
date: 2009-02-13
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg13
---
*(Archived Content)*

TG-13

**Washington, DC**- The U.S. Treasury Department today announced investments of approximately $1.15 billion in 42 banks across the nation as part of its Capital Purchase Program (CPP), a means to directly infuse capital into healthy, viable banks with the goal of increasing the flow of financing available to small businesses and consumers. With additional capital, banks are better able to meet the lending needs of their customers, and businesses have greater access to the credit that they need to keep operating and growing.

Since its inception in October 2008, Treasury has strengthened healthy small and large, regional, and national, financial institutions, as well as Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs), through total CPP investments of $195.33 billion in 359 institutions in 45 states and Puerto Rico. To date, the largest investment was $25 billion and the smallest investment was approximately $1 million.

Among the most recent banks to receive Treasury funding was Legacy Bancorp of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, a CDFI founded by African-American women and one of the fastest growing community banks in the nation. CDFIs such as Legacy provide vital credit and financial services to low-income areas that are often unavailable from commercial banks.

Farmers and Merchants Bank, which primarily serves farms and rural businesses, became the first Nebraska bank to receive Treasury investments through CPP.

We believe this investment will enable our institution to take advantage of opportunities to further strengthen our position in the marketplace. In particular, we believe the investment will increase Farmers & Merchants Bank's lending capacity, thereby enhancing our ability to assist our core customers in meeting the challenges of a recessionary environment while positioning them to take full advantage of an economic recovery, said Gerry Dunlap, President and Chief Executive of Country Bankshares, Inc., the bank holding company of Farmers and Merchants Bank.

Also receiving CPP funding was Firstbank Corporation of Alma, Michigan, which operates 53 banking offices throughout the state's Lower Penninsula.

This additional capital will facilitate expanded service to our customers and the communities we serve in Michigan, said Chief Executive Officer Thomas R. Sullivan. We plan to use the additional capital to further increase the capacity of our banks to make prudent loans to customers, while serving customer and community needs for deposit and other banking services. This is a time when economies at all levels – local, state, regional, and national – urgently need supportive, quality oriented, well-run banks. As a community banking company with six affiliate banks, we at Firstbank Corporation are excited about the prospects that this additional capital provides.

Under the CPP, Treasury is purchasing up to a total of $250 billion of senior preferred shares from healthy U.S. financial institutions such as those announced today. Institutions that participate in the CPP must comply with restrictions on executive compensation during the period that Treasury holds equity issued through the CPP and agree to limitations on dividends and stock repurchases.  Banks participating in the CPP will pay the Treasury a five percent dividend on senior preferred shares for the first five years following the investment and a rate of nine percent per year thereafter. Banks may repay Treasury under the conditions established in the purchase agreements, and Treasury may sell these shares when market conditions stabilize. Further information about the terms of the program, including weekly transactions, can be found at[http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/eesa/](http://www.financialstability.gov/).

----------

The following is a complete list of banks receiving funding on January 30, 2009:

**Arkansas**Rogers Bancshares, Inc.

$25,000,000

**Arizona**Goldwater Bank, N.A.

$2,568,000

**California**Beach Business Bank

$6,000,000

Central ValleyCommunity Bancorp

$7,000,000

Ojai Community Bank

$2,080,000

Peninsula Bank Holding Co.

$6,000,000

Plumas Bancorp

$11,949,000

Valley Commerce Bancorp

7,700,000

**Colorado**Bankers' Bank of the West Bancorp, Inc.

$12,639,000

**Florida**First Southern Bancorp, Inc.

$10,900,000

**Georgia**Metro City Bank

$7,700,000

**Illinois**PrivateBancorp, Inc.

$243,815,000

**Indiana**AMB Financial Corp.

$3,674,000

**Kansas**Equity Bancshares, Inc.

$8,750,000

UBT Bancshares, Inc.

$8,950,000

**Maryland**Monument Bank

$4,734,000

Annapolis Bancorp, Inc.

$8,152,000

First United Corporation

$30,000,000

**Maine**Katahdin Bankshares Corp.

$10,449,000

**Michigan**Firstbank Corporation

$33,000,000

Flagstar Bancorp, Inc.

$266,657,000

**Missouri**Guaranty Federal Bancshares, Inc.

$17,000,000

**North Carolina**Oak Ridge Financial Services, Inc.

$7,700,000

**Nebraska**Adbanc, Inc

$12,720,000

Country Bank Shares, Inc.

$7,525,000

**New Hampshire**Northway Financial, Inc.

$10,000,000

**New Jersey**Community Partners Bancorp

$9,000,000

Hilltop Community Bancorp, Inc.

$4,000,000

Parke Bancorp, Inc.

$16,288,000

Stewardship Financial Corporation

$10,000,000

**Ohio**Peoples Bancorp Inc.

$39,000,000

**Pennsylvania**DNB Financial Corporation

$11,750,000

First Resource Bank

$2,600,000

**South Carolina**Greer Bancshares Incorporated

9,993,000

**Tennessee**F & M Bancshares, Inc.

$4,609,000

**Texas**Central Bancshares, Inc.

$5,800,000

**Virginia**Central Virginia Bankshares, Inc.

$11,385,000

Middleburg Financial Corporation

$22,000,000

WashingtonFirst Bank

$6,633,000

**Washington**W.T.B. Financial Corporation

$110,000,000

**Wisconsin**Anchor BanCorp Wisconsin Inc.

$110,000,000

Legacy Bancorp, Inc.

$5,498,000
