---
title: OFAC Removes 49 Individuals from Narcotics Sanctions List
date: 2009-07-01T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg194
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

TG-194

 

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today announced the removal of 49 Colombian individuals from the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) list, all either current or former employees of Copservir, a previously-designated entity that operates the retail drugstore chain known as Drogas La Rebaja in Colombia.Copservir and the Drogas La Rebaja drugstore chain are under the administration and control of the Colombian government, which took control of Copservir in September 2004 pursuant to a criminal asset forfeiture action. The 49 individuals removed from OFAC's SDN list have severed ties with the Cali Cartel leaders Miguel and Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela.

Today's action illustrates the powerful impact that U.S. sanctions have on weakening these drug cartels by targeting their extensive networks, said OFAC Director Adam J. Szubin. These 49 individuals have cut ties with the leaders of the Cali Cartel and supported the Colombian government's ongoing forfeiture process.

In November 2004, OFAC adopted a licensing policy to issue specific licenses, on a case by case basis, authorizing U.S. suppliers to engage in certain transactions with Copservir.These licenses were issued subject to Copservir's continued operation as a legitimate business under the control of the Colombian government under a policy intended to allow the Colombian government to manage the Drogas La Rebaja drugstore chain and preserve the jobs of several thousand innocent Colombians who were employed by brothers, Miguel and Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela through their front company Copservir.The ownership interests held by Cali Cartel leaders Miguel and Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela and their family members are in the process of being forfeited by the Colombian government.

The Rodriguez Orejuela brothers were the leaders of the Cali drug cartel, once the most powerful cocaine trafficking organization in Colombia.  They are now serving prison sentences in the United States after pleading guilty to federal narcotics trafficking and money laundering charges in September 2006.

The 49 individuals removed today were previously listed as Specially Designated Narcotics Traffickers pursuant to Executive Order 12978 of October 21, 1995, which applies financial sanctions against Colombia's drug cartels.The names of the 49 individuals are available at:[http://www.treas.gov/offices/enforcement/ofac/actions/index.shtml](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/economic-policy/taxable-resources/Pages/actions_index.aspx).

Today's action brings the total number of removals of Specially Designated Narcotics Traffickers in 2009 to 76.  In 2008, OFAC removed 141 names from the SDN list.

###
