---
title: Secretary Geithner Names David A. Lebryk Commissioner of FMS
date: 2009-06-26
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg186
---
*(Archived Content)*

  

TG-186



**WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that David A. Lebryk has been selected as Commissioner of Treasury's Financial Management Service (FMS).  Lebryk has served as Deputy Commissioner since January 2008, and since April 2009, has served as Acting Commissioner following Commissioner Judy Tillman's retirement.



Dave will provide strong leadership to FMS as it carries out its essential and far-reaching mission. His knowledge, broad perspective and inclusive management approach provides an ideal fit for FMS and Treasury, said Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner.



FMS, a bureau of the U.S. Department of the Treasury, is primarily responsible for the collection of government revenues, payment of federal benefits, such as social security and veterans' benefits, and tax refunds, debt collection and government-wide accounting.  In the past year, FMS issued approximately one billion federal payments to more than 100 million people and collected nearly $3.2 trillion of federal revenues.



As Commissioner, Lebryk will provide leadership, policy direction and guidance for FMS' financial management programs, including payments, collections, debt collection, and government-wide accounting and financial reporting.  He will also oversee a daily cash flow of more than $67 billion and government-wide programs related to credit and cash management.



Prior to his appointment at FMS, Lebryk served as the senior career executive at the U.S. Mint.  From October 2002 to December 2007, he served in the capacity of Deputy Director, and from August 2005 through September 2006, he was the Acting Director of the U.S. Mint.  There he had responsibility for the day-to-day operations of the world's largest manufacturer of coins, medals and coin products. Lebryk was a 2005 recipient of a Presidential Rank Award reserved for career senior executives who have a sustained record of extraordinary leadership and achievement.



Before joining the U.S. Mint, Lebryk held the position of Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fiscal Operations and Policy at the U.S. Department of the Treasury, where he oversaw the development and implementation of policies and programs relating to the government's cash management, debt financing, investment and administration of trust funds, payments and collections.



Lebryk also has served as Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources for the Treasury Department.  He has served as an advisor to the Deputy Secretary of the Treasury and to three Under Secretaries for Domestic Finance.



###
