---
title: Treasury announces $268 Million more in Recovery Act Funds to Create Jobs, Provide Affordable Housing
date: 2009-06-22
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg180
---
*(Archived Content)*

TG-180



**WASHINGTON –**As part of the Obama Administration's effort to create jobs and ease pressures on the housing market, the U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced $268 million in American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (Recovery Act) funding to spur the development of affordable housing units in Indiana, Missouri, Tennessee, and  Washington D.C.



Today's announcement ofhousing funds demonstrates how President Obama's Recovery Act is putting our nation on the path to economic stability, one community at a time, said Treasury Deputy Secretary Neal Wolin.  This initiative will help spur construction and development, create much needed jobs, and increasethe availability of affordable housing for families around the country.



The labor and housing crises in this country are deeply inter-connected. Since their peak level at the beginning of 2006,housing starts have fallen 80 percent. Houses currently under construction are at a 13-year low, down more than 60 percent from the peak in the first quarter of 2006. This collapse has led to severe job losses in the residential building and specialty trades sector related to housing, with employment down by nearly one-third -- a loss ofoveronemillion jobs.  Such losses not only indicate significant problems in the residential construction sector, but also suggest that the need for affordable housing has risen markedly during the recession.



In response, the Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Treasury Department have been implementing new efforts designed to help homeowners while providing important assistance to homebuilders.  Specifically, Treasury has launched an innovative program that will provide more than$3 billion from the Recovery Act to put people to work building quality, affordable housing for individuals and families affected by the current crisis.



The Treasury Department will work with state housing agencies to jump start the development or renovation of qualified affordable housing for families across the country.  Under thisprogram, after meeting certain eligibility requirements, state housing agencies will receive funding to construct affordable housing developments.



Today, the Treasury Department is announcing the second round of recipients: $164 million in Indiana; $17 million in Missouri; $53 million in Tennessee; and $ 33.7 million in the District of Columbia.



The funds announced today are the second round in a series of awards based on a rolling application process.  The Treasury Department anticipates making similar announcements in the coming weeks.  To view the terms and conditions for the Treasury application, please click[here](http://treas.gov/recovery/LIH-grants.shtml).



For further information on local projects, please contact:



Indiana Housing and Community Development – David Kaufmann, (317) 324-0934Missouri Housing Development Commission – Andi Benson, (816) 759-6658Tennessee Housing Development Agency – Patricia Smith, (615) 815-2185DC Department of Housing and Community Development –Angelita Colon Francia, (202) 442-7277



###
