---
title: 'United States Designates North Korean Entities and Individuals for Activities Related to North Korea''s Weapons of Mass Destruction Program'
date: 2010-08-30T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg840
---
*(Archived Content)*

​**TG-840 WASHINGTON** – In joint actions, the U.S. Departments of Treasury and State today announced the designations of five North Korean entities and three individuals under Executive Order (E.O.) 13382 for supporting North Korea's Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) program. Executive Order 13382 is an authority aimed at freezing the assets of WMD proliferators and their supporters thereby isolating them from the U.S. financial and commercial systems.   Also today, President Obama signed an Executive Order that directs the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to target for sanctions individuals and entities facilitating North Korean trafficking in arms and related materiel; procurement of luxury goods; and engagement in illicit activities, including money laundering, the counterfeiting of goods and currency, bulk cash smuggling and narcotics trafficking. The new Executive Order supplements E.O 13382, under which North Korean entities have been designated to date, and is consistent with measures required in UNSCRs 1718 and 1874.** Korea Taesong Trading Company and Korea Heungjin Trading Company** Pyongyang-based entities the Korea Taesong Trading Company and Korea Heungjin Trading Company, are used by the Korea Mining Development Trading Corporation (KOMID) for trading purposes. Korea Taesong Trading Company has acted on behalf of KOMID in dealings with Syria, and Korea Heungjin Trading Company acts as the procurement arm of KOMID. Korea Heungjin Trading Company is also suspected to have been involved in supplying missile-related goods to Iran's Shahid Hemmat Industrial Group.   KOMID is Pyongyang's premier arms dealer and main exporter of goods and equipment related to ballistic missiles and conventional weapons, with offices located in multiple countries around the world with the primary goal of facilitating weapons sales and seeking new customers for its weapons. It was listed in the Annex to E.O. 13382 of June 2005 and has been sanctioned by the United States repeatedly over the last 10 years for trading in missile technology. KOMID was also designated by the UNSCR 1718 Committee to be subject to the asset freeze provisions of UNSCR 1718.   Korea Taesong Trading Company was previously sanctioned by the U.S. Department of State in 2008 under the Iran, North Korea, and Syria Nonproliferation Act (INKSNA). INKSNA provides for the imposition of measures on entities or individuals for the transfer to or acquisition from Iran, Syria, or North Korea of equipment or technology controlled under multilateral export control lists or otherwise having the potential to make a material contribution to the proliferation of WMD or cruise or ballistic missile systems.** Second Economic Committee, Munitions Industry Department and Second Academy of Natural Sciences** The Munitions Industry Department and Second Economic Committee are involved in key aspects of North Korea's missile program. The Munitions Industry Department is responsible for overseeing the development of North Korea's ballistic missiles, including the Taepo Dong-2.   The Second Economic Committee is responsible for overseeing the production of North Korea's ballistic missiles. The Second Economic Committee also directs the activities of KOMID.   The Second Academy of Natural Sciences is a national-level organization responsible for research and development of North Korea's advanced weapons systems, including missiles and probably nuclear weapons. The Second Academy of Natural Sciences uses a number of subordinate organizations to obtain technology, equipment, and information from overseas, including Tangun Trading Corporation, for use in North Korea's missile and probably nuclear weapons programs.   Tangun Trading Corporation is subordinate to the Second Academy of Natural Sciences and is primarily responsible for the procurement of commodities and technologies to support North Korea's defense research and development programs and procurement, including materials that are controlled under the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) or the Australia Group. Tangun Trading Corporation was designated by the Department of State pursuant to E.O. 13382 in September 2009. Tangun Trading Corporation was also designated by the UNSCR 1718 Committee to be subject to the asset freeze provisions of UNSCR 1718.** Ri Je-son and Ri Hong-sop** Ri Je-son and Ri Hong-sop act for or on behalf of the General Bureau of Atomic Energy (GBAE), which is responsible for North Korea's nuclear program and manages operations at the Yongbyon Nuclear Research Center. GBAE was designated by the United Nations in July 2009 for its involvement in North Korea's nuclear program and subsequently sanctioned by the Department of State under E.O. 13382 in September 2009.   Ri Je-son is the Director of GBAE and is responsible for facilitating several nuclear endeavors including GBAE's management of Yongbyon Nuclear Research Center and Namchongang Trading Corporation.   Ri Hong-sop is a councilor for GBAE. He is also the former Director of Yongbyon Nuclear Research Center. In that capacity he oversaw the three core facilities that the DPRK used to produce of weapons-grade plutonium: the Fuel Fabrication Facility, the 5MWe Experimental Reactor, and the Radiological Laboratory (Reprocessing Plant).   Ri Je-son and Ri Hong-sop were also designated by the UNSCR 1718 Committee to be subject to the asset freeze and travel ban provisions of UNSCR 1718.** Yun Ho-lin** Yun Ho-jin acts for or on behalf of Namchongang Trading Corporation (NCG), a North Korean trading company subordinate to GBAE. NCG has been involved in the procurement of Japanese- origin vacuum pumps that were identified at a North Korean nuclear facility, as well as nuclear-related procurement associated with a German individual. NCG was designated by the State Department pursuant to E.O. 13382 in June 2009.   Yun Ho-jin has acted on behalf of NCG in various capacities since the 1980s. As a senior official at NCG, he oversaw the import of items needed for North Korea's uranium enrichment program.   Through an NCG office in China, Yun Ho-jin was also involved in purchases of sensitive material linked to the construction of a nuclear reactor in Syria.   Yun Ho-jin was also designated by the UNSCR 1718 Committee to be subject to the asset freeze and travel ban provisions of UNSCR 1718.    Identifying Information:   Entity:                                     Korea Taesong Trading Company Location:                     Pyongyang, North Korea   Entity:                                                 Korea Heungjin Trading Company AKA:                                      Hunjin Trading Co. Location:                     Pyongyang, North Korea   Entity:                         Second Economic Committee Location:                     Kangdong, North Korea   Entity:                         Munitions Industry Department AKA:                          Military Supplies Industry Department Location:                     Pyongyang, North Korea   Entity:                         Second Academy of Natural Sciences AKA:                          2nd Academy of Natural Sciences AKA:                          Che 2 Chayon Kwahak-Won AKA:                          Academy of Natural Sciences AKA:                          Chayon Kwahak-Won AKA:                          National Defense Academy AKA:                          Kukpang Kwahak-Won AKA:                          Second Academy of Natural Sciences Research Institute SANSRI Location:                     Pyongyang, North Korea   Individual:                  Ri Je-Son AKA:                          Ri Che-Son DOB:                          1938   Individual:                  Ri Hong-Sop DOB:                          1940   Individual:                  Yun Ho-jin AKA:                          Yun Ho-chin
