---
title:  Treasury, White House Council on Women and Girls to Host Women in Finance Symposium
date: 2010-03-19T00:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg596
---
*(Archived Content)*TG-596

 

**Administration Invites Next Generation of Women Leaders From Across the Country to Submit Questions, Gather via Watch Parties for Event Webcast  WASHINGTON**– On Monday, March 29, 2010, the U.S. Department of the Treasury, in partnership with The White House Council on Women and Girls, will convene a Women in Finance Symposium in celebration of Women's History Month. The symposium will bring together senior administration officials, private sector leaders, university presidents and women entering the field for a series of panel discussions to recognize the contributions of women and to discuss the best means to foster success among future generations of women in the public and private finance sectors.

The Administration is also offering the opportunity for students around the country to engage in the symposium via webcast. In addition to providing insight about how each achieved success in the world of finance, symposium panelists will answer questions submitted in advance from the next generation of women leaders. Students and young professionals can submit questions to[WomenInFinance](mailto:WomenInFinance@treasury.gov)through the close of business on Friday, March 26, and gather for "watch parties" to see their questions answered live throughout the symposium.

CNBC anchor Maria Bartiromo will moderate the Symposium's opening panel and broadcast "Closing Bell with Maria Bartiromo" live from the Treasury Department later that afternoon.

**WHO:**Treasury Secretary Tim GeithnerTreasurer of the United States Rosie RiosFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation Chairman Sheila BairSecurities and Exchange Commission Chairwoman Mary SchapiroCouncil of Economic Advisers Chairman Christina RomerSmall Business Administrator Karen G. MillsSenior Advisor to the President Valerie JarrettCongressional Oversight Panel Chair Elizabeth WarrenObama Administration officialsWomen business leaders*Complete list of participants to be announced.*

**WHAT:**Women in Finance Symposium**WHEN:**Monday, March 29, 2010; 10:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. EDT**WHERE:**Cash RoomU.S. Treasury Department1500 Pennsylvania Ave., NWWashington, D.C. 20220

*The event will also be streamed live on www.treasury.gov. *

MEDIA NOTES:

*All discussions are open press but space is limited and is first come, first serve. The event will also be streamed live on www.treasury.gov. *

*Media without Treasury press credentials planning to attend must contact Frances Anderson in Treasury's Office of Public Affairs at (202) 622-2960 with the following information: name, Social Security number and date of birth.  This information may also be emailed to frances.anderson@treasury.gov.   Congressional and White House press passes will not grant you access to Treasury. Please note if you have camera equipment. **The deadline to RSVP is Friday, March 26, 2010 at 2:00 PM ET.***

*Press with camera equipment should arrive at the Moat Entrance (south side of the Treasury building, adjacent to the Hamilton entrance) no later than 8:30 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and escorts to the Cash Room. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. All other media can enter the Treasury building through the Pennsylvania Avenue entrance and should allow 45 minutes to clear through security. **Final access to the Cash Room will be 9:45 a.m.***

###​
