---
title: Top-Scoring National Financial Capability Challenge Students Ring the Closing Bell® at the NYSE
date: 2010-04-30T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg678
---
*(Archived Content)*

TG-678

 

**Photos of the Bell-ringing are Available here  Information about Participating Students and State-specific Performance is Available at***www.challenge.treas.gov  *

**WASHINGTON** -- Today, students and educators who participated in the Obama Administration's National Financial Capability Challenge visited the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) to tour the facility and ring The Closing Bell. Today's visit was part of the Administration's ongoing activity during National Financial Literacy Month and follows an event earlier this week in which Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner and Education Secretary Arne Duncan honored the outstanding achievement of many of the participating students in a recognition event at the Treasury Department. The delegation visiting the NYSE today is comprised of students and educators from the New York/New Jersey/Connecticut area, joined by Michelle Greene, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Financial Education and Financial Access, U.S. Department of the Treasury.

Understanding how our financial system works is critical to making smart personal finance decisions, said Michelle Greene. Today's visit is a great opportunity for students to learn more about that system and complements the Administration's broader financial capability efforts.

Financial education is a critical component of a well-rounded education, said Matt Yale, deputy chief of staff at the U.S. Department of Education. Teaching students vital concepts such as saving and investing will benefit them for the rest of their lives. The students, parents and teachers being recognized today have shown their commitment to this important issue, and we hope to see others follow their example.

NYSE Euronext is proud to partner with the U.S. Departments of Treasury and Education in their efforts to support financial capability for young adults on a national level, said Duncan Niederauer, CEO, NYSE Euronext. Financial literacy has become a curriculum in and of itself, providing people of all ages with the necessary skills to become financially-capable and astute.

**The following students joined parents and educators in a visit to the NYSE today:**

Marc H.

Guirand

Stamford, CT

Kevin L.

Kendall

Stamford, CT

Dean L.

Betty

East Orange, NJ

Sofia

Salcedo

Lodi, NJ

Kevin M.

Castillo

Parlin, NJ

Cierra N.

Burtner

Brocton, NY

Mitchell

Chang

Great Neck, NY

Owen P.

Duffy

New York, NY

Evan R.

Smith

New York, NY

Anthony

Aprile

Smithtown, NY

Aneesh K.

Bhattacharya

White Plains, NY

**About the National Financial Capability Challenge**The National Financial Capability Challenge – announced in December by Treasury Secretary Geithner and Education Secretary Duncan – is designed to promote financial education among high school students across the country. Educators who registered for the Challenge received a free Educator Toolkit to complement their own lesson plans. Some educators taught the material to students before administering the exam, while others used the exam as a pre-test to establish a baseline of knowledge. Most teachers administering the Challenge were the only teachers in their schools to sign up.

Educators and students who scored in the top 20 percent nationally and those who were among the top scorers in their school will receive official award certificates. Additionally, the Charles Schwab Foundation will soon name 20 students, chosen from among the Challenge participants, who will receive $1,000 scholarships. Schwab will also donate $1,000 to the school of each scholarship recipient.Students who scored in the top 20 percent nationally and are from one of the ten states with the highest participation rates in the Challenge are eligible for these scholarships.

For more information about the National Financial Capability Challenge, top scorers by state and aggregated exam results, go to[www.challenge.treas.gov](http://www.challenge.treas.gov/).

###

**REPORTS**

- [Photos](http://www.flickr.com/photos/ustreasury/sets/72157623840061215/)
