---
title: Joint Statement of Secretary Geithner and Secretary Clinton on the Announcement of Japanese Autonomous Sanctions on Iran
date: 2010-09-03T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg844
---
*(Archived Content)*

​**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Departments of Treasury and State today released the following statement from Secretary Tim Geithner and Secretary Hillary Clinton on Japan's adoption of new sanctions against Iran:   The United States welcomes the announcement by Japan of new sanctions on Iran that implement UN Security Council 1929. They mark a significant step forward in the international community's efforts to combat proliferation and prevent Iran's development of nuclear weapons.  Japan joins other responsible nations that have also implemented such sanctions on Iran for its failure to meet its international obligations, including the European Union, Australia, Canada, and Norway.   We applaud in particular Japan's decision to impose sanctions on a number of Iranian entities and individuals of proliferation concern, including many of Iran's banks such as Bank Mellat, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, and the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines.  These sanctions – combined with Japan's establishment of a financial authorization system for all transactions with Iran; prohibition of the transfer of proliferation sensitive dual-use items to Iran; and of any new investment or sale of goods, services, and technology to Iran's energy sector – will deepen Iran's isolation from the international financial, industrial, and energy sectors and protect Japanese banks and businesses from Iran's ongoing efforts to conduct illicit activities.  We recognize and appreciate that as a major trading partner of Iran, Japan's decision to robustly implement UN Security Council resolution 1929 is not without a cost.    Japan's actions underscore the international resolve to present Iran's leaders with a clear choice: Meet your international obligations and enjoy the benefits of integration into the global system or continue to reject your responsibilities and face growing isolation and consequences. We have made an unprecedented effort to reach out to Iran, and we remain committed to a diplomatic solution to international concerns regarding Iran's nuclear activities.  We believe that additional pressure on Iran is the best way to reach that goal.    We encourage other states to follow Japan's example and impose robust measures in support of the international community's efforts.
