---
title: S. Leslie Ireland Confirmed as Assistant Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis
date: 2010-07-01
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg765
---
*(Archived Content)*



TG-765



**WASHINGTON **– S. Leslie Ireland was confirmed on Wednesday night by the United States Senate to serve as the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Assistant Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis. In this role, Ireland will lead the Office of Intelligence and Analysis, which is responsible for the receipt, analysis, and dissemination of intelligence related to the Department's mission to safeguard the international financial system from abuse and to combat threats to U.S. national security.



Leslie Ireland is exceptionally well qualified to lead Treasury's intelligence office, which plays a critical role in our efforts to confront national security threats. She joins an excellent team in our office of terrorism and financial intelligence, said Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner.



Ireland has been a career intelligence officer for nearly 25 years and has held a variety of positions in the analytical, collection, interagency and policy communities. Most recently she was intelligence briefer to President Obama.  Prior to that she served as the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) Iran Mission Manager, where she was responsible for integrating collection and analysis on Iran across the Intelligence Community.



During her career, she has also served as Executive Assistant to the Director and Deputy Director of Central Intelligence and in various analytical and management portfolios at CIA related to the Middle East and weapons of mass destruction.  Ireland was also detailed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense as Country Director for Iran and Kuwait.



Ireland is a recipient of the National Intelligence Distinguished Service Medal, awarded for service as the DNI Iran Mission Manager, and the CIA's Intelligence Commendation Medal, awarded for analytical work in support of Operation Desert Storm.  She is a graduate of Franklin and Marshall College with a B.A. in Government and holds an M.A. in Russian Area Studies from Georgetown University.



###
