---
title: Charles Collyns Confirmed as Assistant Secretary for International Finance
date: 2010-02-11
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg545
---
*(Archived Content)*



TG-545

  

**WASHINGTON **– Charles Collyns was confirmed today by the United States Senate to serve as the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Assistant Secretary for International Finance.In this position, Collyns is responsible for leading Treasury's work on international monetary policy, international financial institutions, coordination with the G-7/G-8 and G-20, and regional and bilateral economic issues.



Charles's work in the international arena will play a central role in Treasury's efforts to achieve stronger growth here at home. I welcome him to Treasury and look forward to working with him on this incredibly robust agenda, said Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner.



Collyns served as the Deputy Director of the Research Department at the International Monetary Fund (IMF), where he led the team responsible for preparing the World Economic Outlook.Prior to joining the Research Department in 2006, he has held a range of positions at the IMF, including being responsible for the organization's work on Japan from 1997–2001, on the United States from 2001–2003, and on Brazil from 2004–2006.



Collyns has also authored a number of publications on international macro-economics. In addition to the World Economic Outlook report, he co-authored Post Bubble Blues – How Japan Responded to Asset Price Collapse, Managing Financial Crises – Recent Experience and Lessons for Latin America, and Stabilization and Reform in Latin America – A Macroeconomic Perspective on the Experience since the early 1990s.



He received a Doctorate in Economics from Oxford University after obtaining first class honors as an undergraduate at Cambridge University.



Collyns is married to Myriam Collyns and has two daughters, Carmen and Isabel.



###
