---
title: Treasury Designates Rendon Herrera Facilitator as a Specially Designated Narcotics Trafficker
date: 2010-10-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg916
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view or print the PDF content on this page, download the free Adobe® Acrobat® Reader®.*

TG-916

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today designated Guillermo Leon Valencia Cossio, former Regional Director for the Colombian Prosecutor's office in Medellin, as a Specially Designated Narcotics Trafficker pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act) for his ties to the criminal organization of Colombian narcotics trafficker Daniel Rendon Herrera (a.k.a. Don Mario).  Valencia Cossio was arrested in August 2008 by Colombian authorities and is currently on trial in Colombia on charges of corruption and conspiracy for providing material assistance to the drug trafficking activities of paramilitary groups, including Daniel Rendon Herrera's criminal organization.

"Today's designation targets Guillermo Leon Valencia Cossio for his abuse of power as a public official in Colombia on behalf of Daniel Rendon Herrera's drug trafficking organization," said OFAC Director Adam J. Szubin.

Identified as a drug kingpin by President Obama in May 2009, Rendon Herrera has extensive drug transportation networks throughout Colombia that have facilitated the shipment of cocaine to the United States and Europe.  Rendon Herrera faces federal narcotics importation and narco-terrorism conspiracy charges in the United States.  Among the charges against Valencia Cossio is that he provided sensitive information concerning the Colombian government's investigation of Rendon Herrera to Juan Felipe Sierra Fernandez, Jhon Freddy Manco Torres (a.k.a. El Indio), and Camilo Torres Martinez (a.k.a. Fritanga), members of Rendon Herrera's criminal organization designated by OFAC in March 2010.

In a separate action, OFAC identified two U.S.-based companies, Running Brook, LLC (USA) and La Hacienda (USA) as blocked pursuant to the Kingpin Act for being owned or controlled by Fernando Melciades Zevallos Gonzales, a Peruvian national identified by the President as significant foreign narcotics traffickers pursuant to the Kingpin Act in 2004.  This action prohibits U.S. persons from conducting financial or commercial transactions with the identified companies and freezes any assets they may have under U.S. jurisdiction.

Today's actions taken pursuant to the Kingpin Act prohibit U.S. persons from conducting transactions with the designee and the blocked companies and freeze any assets they may have under U.S. jurisdiction.

Today's designation and identifications are part of Treasury's ongoing efforts under the Kingpin Act to apply financial measures against significant foreign narcotics traffickers worldwide.  OFAC has designated almost 800 businesses and individuals around the world linked to 87 drug kingpins since June 2000.  Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties.  Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million.  Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million.  Other individuals face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.

To view Daniel Rendon Herrera's organization, please visit,[link](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/Chart20-20Rendon20Herrera20-and-20Valencia20Cossio2010-19-10.pdf).

###
