---
title: Treasury Designates Al-Qai’da Finance Section Leader
date: 2010-08-24T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg838
---
*(Archived Content)*

  **WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today further targeted the financial network of al-Qai'da by designating Muhammad Abdallah Hasan Abu-al-Khayr, a key leader of the terrorist organization's finance section. Al-Khayr was designated pursuant to Executive Order 13224 for acting for or on behalf of al-Qai'da. Executive Order 13224 freezes any assets al-Khayr has under U.S. jurisdiction and prohibits U.S. persons from engaging in any transactions with him. The United Nations 1267 Sanctions Committee took similar action against Al-Khayr today.     Al-Khayr appears on a 2009 list of 85 persons wanted by the government of Saudi Arabia, in part because of his role as an al-Qai'da financial facilitator. He has transferred hundreds of thousands of dollars for a specific terrorist attack against U.S. interests.  Al-Khayr also acts for al-Qai'da in a leadership role on the media committee, and has on at least one occasion recruited a member for al-Qai'da. His relationship with al-Qai'da began with military training the terrorist group provided him in the mid-1990s. Al-Khayr is a son-in-law of Usama bin Laden and has also provided services to bin Laden as a bodyguard.   After the death in May of Mustafa Abu al-Yazid, who essentially served as al-Qai'da's chief financial officer, we will continue to work with our allies to target those like al-Khayr who could step into al-Yazid's shoes, said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Stuart Levey.  Today's designation of al-Khayr by the United States and the United Nations will help to ensure that that al-Qai'da remains in severe financial straits.   Identifying Information:   MUHAMMAD ABDALLAH HASAN ABU-AL-KHAYR AKA:              Abdallah al-Halabi AKA:              'Abdallah al-Halabi al-Madani AKA:              Abdallah al-Makki AKA:              Abdallah el Halabi AKA:              Abdullah al-Halabi AKA:              Abu 'Abdallah al-Halabi AKA:              Abu Abdallah al-Madani AKA:              Mohammed Abdullah Hassan Abul-Khair AKA:              Muhammad Bin- 'Abdullah Bin-Hamd Abu-al-Khayr AKA:              Muhannad al-Jaddawi POB:               Al-Madinah al-Munawwarah. Saudi Arabia DOB:              June 19, 1975 Alt. DOB:       June 18, 1975 Passport:          Saudi A741097                         Issued: November 14, 1995; Expired: September 19, 2000 National Identification Number:  Saudi, 1006010555       ###
