---
title: Treasury Announces Marketable Borrowing Estimates
date: 2010-02-01
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg524
---
*(Archived Content)*

TG-524

[*To view the Sources and Uses Table, visit link*](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/Sources-and-Uses-February-2010.xls).

**Washington, D.C. -- **The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced its current estimates of net marketable borrowing for the January – March 2010 and the April – June 2010 quarters:

- During the January – March 2010 quarter, Treasury expects to issue $392 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-March cash balance of $95 billion, which includes $5 billion for the Supplementary Financing Program (SFP).   The borrowing estimate is $86 billion lower than announced in November 2009.   The decrease in borrowing is primarily related to cash balance adjustments and lower outlays offset partially by lower receipts.
- During the April – June 2010 quarter, Treasury expects to issue $268 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-June cash balance of $85 billion, which includes $5 billion for the SFP.
- These estimates do not include any incremental borrowing needs that would result from a potential increase in issuance under the SFP.

During the October – December 2009 quarter, Treasury issued $260 billion in net marketable debt, finishing the quarter with a cash balance of $194 billion, of which $5 billion was attributable to the SFP.   In November, Treasury had estimated $276 billion in marketable borrowing for the quarter, assuming an end-of-December cash balance of $85 billion, which included an SFP balance of $15 billion.   The decrease in borrowing was primarily related to a lower SFP balance.   The higher end-of-quarter cash balance was primarily related to greater-than-expected Troubled Asset Relief Program repayments in December.

Additional financing details relating to Treasury's Quarterly Refunding will be released at 9:00 a.m. on Wednesday, February 3.

###​​​
