---
title: Administration Invites Next Generation of Women Leaders From Across the Country to Submit Questions, Gather via Watch Parties for Event Webcast
date: 2010-03-26T00:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg613
---
*(Archived Content)*

## ***UPDATED to Include Program Agenda and Complete List of Participants Treasury, White House Council on Women and Girls to Host Women in Finances Symposium Monday, March 29, 2010

TG - 613

**Administration Invites Next Generation of Women Leaders From Across the Country to Submit Questions, Gather via Watch Parties for Event Webcast WASHINGTON**– On Monday, March 29, 2010, the U.S. Department of the Treasury, in partnership with The White House Council on Women and Girls, will convene a Women in Finance Symposium in celebration of Women's History Month. The symposium will bring together senior administration officials, private sector leaders, university presidents and women entering the field for a series of panel discussions to recognize the contributions of women and to discuss the best means to foster success among future generations of women in the public and private finance sectors.

The Administration is also offering the opportunity for students around the country to engage in the symposium via webcast. In addition to providing insight about how each achieved success in the world of finance, symposium panelists will answer questions submitted from the next generation of women leaders. Throughout the event on Monday, questions can be submitted live on Twitter by using the "#WIF" hash tag or by emailing[WomenInFinance@treasury.gov](mailto:WomenInFinance@treasury.gov).

**WHAT **:          Women in Finance Symposium** WHEN:**Monday, March 29, 201010:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. EDT** WHERE:**Cash RoomU.S. Treasury Department1500 Pennsylvania Ave., NWWashington, D.C. 20220The event will also be streamed live on[www.treasury.gov](https://www.treasury.gov/).

Press Details **10:00 AM EDT** Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner, Treasurer Rosie RiosWelcome and OverviewCash RoomU.S. Treasury Department1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NWWashington, D.C.Coverage: Open Press **10:15 AM EDT** WOMEN DRIVERS OF THE ECONOMIC RECOVERY: PATHWAYS TO SUCCESSModerated by Maria Bartiromo, CNBCPanelists: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Chairman Sheila Bair, Securities and Exchange Commission Chairwoman Mary Schapiro, Council of Economic Advisers Chairman Christina Romer, Small Business Administrator Karen G. Mills and Congressional Oversight Panel Chair Elizabeth WarrenCash RoomU.S. Treasury Department1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NWWashington, D.C.Coverage: Open Press **11:20AM EDT** THE LANDSCAPE AND CHALLENGE FOR WOMEN IN FINANCEModerated by Liz Claman, FOX Business NetworkPanelists: President of the American Council on Education Molly Broad, Senior U.S. Investment Strategist for Goldman Sachs Abby Joseph Cohen, Director in the Strategic Client Group of Morgan Stanley Carla Harris, CEO of  Citi Personal Wealth Management Deborah McWhinney and President's Economic Recovery Advisory Board member Laura TysonCash RoomU.S. Treasury Department1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NWWashington, D.C.Coverage: Open Press **12:30 PM EDT** WORKING BREAKOUT LUNCHES: SOLUTIONS AND SUCCESS STORIESHosted by Senior White House and Treasury OfficialsU.S. Treasury Department1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NWWashington, D.C.

Coverage: Open to correspondents only. No recording devices for broadcast purposes will be allowed. Space is extremely limited and will be allocated on a first-come, first-serve basis. Interested reporters should gather at 12:20 PM at the Cash Room press riser for escort.

**1:30 PM EDT **WHITE HOUSE ROLE IN SUPPORT OF WOMENSenior Advisor and Assistant to the President Valerie JarrettCash RoomU.S. Treasury Department1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NWWashington, D.C.Coverage: Open Press** 1:45 PM EDT **CLOSING REMARKSTreasurer Rosie RiosCash RoomU.S. Treasury Department1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NWWashington, D.C.Coverage: Open Press** MEDIA NOTES:**Symposium panels and official remarks are all open to press; working breakout lunches are open to correspondents only. Space is limited and is first come, first serve. The event will also be streamed live on[www.treasury.gov](https://www.treasury.gov/).

Media without Treasury press credentials planning to attend must contact Frances Anderson in Treasury's Office of Public Affairs at (202) 622-2960 with the following information: name, Social Security number and date of birth.  This information may also be emailed to[frances.anderson@treasury.gov](mailto:frances.anderson@treasury.gov).  Congressional and White House press passes will not grant you access to Treasury. Please note if you have camera equipment. The deadline to RSVP is Friday, March 26, 2010 at 2:00 PM ET.

Press with camera equipment should arrive at the Moat Entrance (south side of the Treasury building, adjacent to the Hamilton entrance) no later than 8:30 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and escorts to the Cash Room. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. All other media can enter the Treasury building through the Pennsylvania Avenue entrance and should allow 45 minutes to clear through security. Final access to the Cash Room will be 9:45 a.m.

### ​
