---
title: Mary John Miller Confirmed as Assistant Secretary for Financial Markets
date: 2010-02-11
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg543
---
*(Archived Content)*



TG-543

  

**WASHINGTON **–Mary John Miller was confirmed today by the United States Senate to serve as the Department of the Treasury's Assistant Secretary for Financial Markets. As Assistant Secretary for Financial Markets, Miller will advise the Secretary on broad matters of domestic finance, financial markets, federal, state and local finance, federal government credit policies, lending and privatization. Miller will also serve as the senior member of the Treasury Financing Group and will coordinate the inter-agency President's Working Group on Financial Markets.



I am pleased to have Mary on our team and am confident she will be integral to this Administration's efforts to help maintain stability for the financial markets and finish the work of creating a safer, more stable financial system to serve the needs of American households and businesses, said Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner.



Miller spent 26 years working for T. Rowe Price Group, Inc., most recently as the director of the Fixed Income Division.  She was a member of the firm's Management Committee and also held key investment management responsibilities on the firm's Asset Allocation Committee and as an officer of a number of fixed income mutual funds. Prior to joining T. Rowe Price, Miller was a research associate for The Urban Institute in Washington, D.C.



Miller earned a B.A. from Cornell University and an M.C.R.P. from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.  Miller also has earned her Chartered Financial Analyst designation.She is married to James D. Miller and has two sons, Thomas M. Miller and James J. Miller.



###
