---
title: Secretary Geithner Announces that John G. Walsh Will Become Acting Comptroller of the Currency
date: 2010-07-23
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg787
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

TG-787

**WASHINGTON** - Today, U.S. Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner announced that, when Comptroller of the Currency John C. Dugan leaves office on August 14, John G. Walsh will become Acting Comptroller of the Currency.

Mr. Walsh currently serves as Chief of Staff and Public Affairs for the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), a position he has held since October 17, 2005. In that position, he has been engaged in all aspects of the OCC's operations.

Mr. Walsh joined the OCC from the Group of 30, a consultative group that focuses on international economic and monetary affairs. He joined the Group in 1992, and became Executive Director in 1995. Mr. Walsh served on the Senate Banking Committee from 1986 to 1992 and as an International Economist for the U.S. Department of the Treasury from 1984 to 1986. Mr. Walsh also served with the Office of Management and Budget as an International Program Analyst, with the Mutual Broadcasting System, and in the U.S. Peace Corps in Ghana.

Mr. Walsh's experience in OCC management and the international arena made him a strong fit for his new role. In particular, that experience will be critical as the OCC moves forward to implement the Dodd-Frank legislation and works to establish new international bank capital standards.

Mr. Walsh holds a masters in public policy from the Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University (1978), and graduated magna cum laude from the University of Notre Dame in 1973. He lives in Catonsville, MD. He is married with four children.

 

###
