---
title: Marisa Lago Confirmed as Assistant Secretary for International Markets and Development
date: 2010-02-11
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg544
---
*(Archived Content)*

TG-544

 

**WASHINGTON** – Marisa Lago was confirmed today by the United States Senate to serve as the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Assistant Secretary for International Markets and Development. In this position, Lago is responsible for leading Treasury's role on the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States. She will also direct Treasury's portfolio on international financial services regulation, trade, banking and securities, development, technical assistance and climate finance.

Marisa brings to Treasury extensive expertise in the regulation of financial services internationally and in the negotiation of international agreements. This background will benefit Treasury and help ensure enforcement of high-quality standards across international investment and regulatory issues, said Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner.

Lago most recently served as the President and Chief Executive Officer of Empire State Development, where she pushed forward important long-term development projects, including the revitalization of Erie Canal Harbor in Buffalo, the expansion and renovation of the Jacob Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, and the construction of Brooklyn Bridge Park.

Immediately prior to joining New York State government, Lago spent five years as the Global Head of Compliance for Citigroup's corporate and investment bank.Before joining Citigroup, Lago headed the Office of International Affairs for the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.As the head of the office responsible for all aspects of the SEC's international activities, Lago played a key role in numerous international initiatives involving trade in financial services, international accounting standards, securities activities on the internet and enhancing financial regulation in off-shore financial centers.

As Boston's Chief Economic Development Officer from 1994 to 1997, Lago headed the Boston Redevelopment Authority and was also responsible for the city's public housing, affordable housing, neighborhood development and job training agencies. From 1990 to 1994, she was General Counsel for New York City's Economic Development Corporation.Lago earned a J.D. cum laude in 1982 from Harvard Law School, and a B.S. in physics from Cooper Union in 1977.

Lago is married to Ron Finiw, an architect.

###
