---
title: Treasury Announces Plan to Sell Citigroup Common Stock
date: 2010-03-29
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg615
---
*(Archived Content)*



TG - 615



**WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced its intention to fully dispose of its approximately 7.7 billion shares of Citigroup, Inc. common stock over the course of 2010 subject to market conditions. Treasury received these shares of common stock pursuant to the June 2009 Exchange Agreement between Treasury and Citigroup, which provided for the exchange into common shares of the preferred stock that Treasury purchased in connection with Citigroup's participation in the Capital Purchase Program. Treasury has engaged Morgan Stanley as its capital markets advisor in connection with its Citigroup position.



Treasury intends to sell its Citigroup common shares into the market through various means in an orderly and measured fashion. Treasury intends to initiate its disposition of the common shares pursuant to a pre-arranged written trading plan. The manner, amount and timing of the sales under the plan is dependent upon a number of factors.



This disposition does not affect Treasury's holdings of Citigroup trust preferred securities or warrants for its common stock.



This news release shall not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy. The Citigroup common shares have not been registered under the Securities Act of 1933 and may not be offered or sold in the United States absent registration or an applicable exemption from registration requirements



###​
