---
title: U.S. and Indonesia begin Discussions on Second Tropical Forest Conservation Act Agreement
date: 2010-01-15
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg507
---
*(Archived Content)*



TG-507

  

**JAKARTA**– The U.S. Government commenced discussions this week with the Government of Indonesia toward conclusion of a second debt-for-nature agreement under the U.S. Tropical Forest Conservation Act (TFCA). Grants provided under the TFCA program will support activities such as conserving protected areas, improving natural resource management and supporting the development of sustainable livelihoods for communities that rely on forests. The U.S. Department of the Treasury has provisionally set aside more than $19 million for the treatment of eligible debt.



The first TFCA agreement with Indonesia, signed on June 30, 2009, will reduce the country's debt payments to the U.S. Government by nearly $30 million over eight years.  In return, the Government of Indonesia will commit these funds to support grants to protect and restore tropical forests in Sumatra.  The agreement was the largest debt-for-nature swap under the TFCA thus far and was made possible through contributions of $20 million by the U.S. Government and a combined donation of $2 million from Conservation International and the Indonesian Biodiversity Foundation (Yayasan Keanekaragaman Hayati Indonesia, or KEHATI).



To date, 13 countries have entered into debt-for-nature agreements under the TFCA: Bangladesh, Belize, Botswana, Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Indonesia, Jamaica, Panama (two agreements), Paraguay, Peru (two agreements) and the Philippines. Over time, these 15 debt-for-nature programs will together generate more than $218 million to protect tropical forests.



###
