---
title: Treasury Targets Financial Network of Pakistan-Based Terrorist Organization Lashkar-E Tayyiba
date: 2010-11-24
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg980
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON **– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated three senior members and financiers of Lashkar-e Tayyiba (LET) as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224 for acting for or on behalfof LET.  Designated today were Hafiz Abdur Rauf, a member of LET's senior leadership and head of LET's Falah-i Insaniat Foundation (FIF); Mian Abdullah, the head of LET's Traders' Department; and Mohammad Naushad Alam Khan, a key financial facilitator for LET.  As a result of today's action, U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in any transactions with these individuals, and any assets the designees have under U.S. jurisdiction are frozen.In a related action, the U.S. Department of State today designated FIF as an alias of LET under section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) and E.O. 13224.   Few individuals are more integral to LET's fundraising than Hafiz Abdur Rauf and Mian Abdullah, said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Stuart Levey.  In their respective capacities, today's designees play key roles in advancing LET's operations and soliciting financial support on its behalf.   LET has claimed responsibility for numerous terrorist acts against Pakistani, Indian and U.S. interests and is responsible for the November 2008 Mumbai attacks and July 2006 Mumbai train bombings. LET was designated by the Department of State as a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) and under E.O. 13224 as a SDGT in December 2001. It was added to the UN 1267 Committee's Consolidated List in May 2005.   **Hafiz Abdur Rauf** ********  Hafiz Abdur Rauf, a member of LET's senior leadership since at least 1999, is the FIF chief, operating LET's relief activities under the FIF alias. As of mid-2009, LET was using the name FIF to fundraise and evade international pressure on LET following the November 2008 attacks in Mumbai, India. In 2009, Rauf participated in a fundraiser in Pakistan that raised money for the organization under the FIF alias.   Under the direct command of LET's overall leader and chief, Muhammad Saeed, Rauf was LET's Director of Humanitarian Relief in 2008 and LET's Director of Public Service in 2003. In August 2008, at the direction of Muhammad Saeed, Rauf led an LET/Jamaat-ud Dawa (JUD) delegation to assess LET/JUD relief and fundraising in Bajaur, Pakistan.   Rauf has also acted as a spokesperson for LET, speaking on behalf of the organization to the media, through LET's website, and at public forums. He also develops high-profile, media programs through FIF to gain support for LET.  In a December 2008 interview on LET's website, Rauf detailed LET/JUD's welfare activities, referring to it as his organization. In August 2003, Rauf told a Pakistani newsweekly that LET/JUD was collecting funds and carrying out relief operations, despite a ban by the Government of Pakistan on the organization's activities.   Rauf previously headed LET's charitable wing, Idara Khidmat-e-Khalq (IKK), and LET/JUD's welfare wing. In mid-2007, Rauf traveled to Peshawar, Pakistan to supervise IKK relief activities.He also presided over an IKK meeting during which he presented a report on LET activities in support of flood victims. In May 2004, Rauf presented the annual report of a medical organization in his capacity as chief of JUD's welfare wing.   JUD and IKK were designated as aliases of LET under E.O. 13224 in April 2006.  Muhammad Saeed was designated as a SDGT in May 2008. Saeed and JUD were added to the UN 1267 Committee's Consolidated List in December 2008.   **Mian Abdullah** ********  Mian Abdullah serves as the head of LET's Traders' Department. In this capacity, he liaises with prominent Pakistani businessmen and solicits financial support for LET. Prior to assuming this role, Abdullah has been a member of LET since 1989 and was LET's Director of Finance, a position he assumed from Haji Muhammad Ashraf following Ashraf's designation as a SDGT in May 2008 and his addition to the UN 1267 Consolidated List in December 2008.   Abdullah was also the head of LET's training camps in early 2009, having replaced Nasir Javaid, who was named a SDGT in July 2009. Abdullah has also served as an LET leader in Peshawar, Pakistan, and as an instructor in an LET camp in Afghanistan.   **Mohammad Naushad Alam Khan** ****  Mohammad Naushad Alam Khan is a key financial facilitator for LET who supports theorganization through an international counterfeit currency and smuggling network. Naushad has recruited members to LET's smuggling network, provided them with counterfeit currency and facilitated the network's operations.   He travels between addresses in Pakistan and Bangladesh. In April 2008, Naushad wasarrested by Bangladeshi authorities in Dhaka for laundering approximately $125,000 worth of counterfeit Indian rupees. As of 2008, Naushad was also a close aide of a senior Harakat ul-Jihad-i-Islami/Bangladesh (HUJI-B) leader, with whom he fought in Afghanistan. HUJI-B was named a SDGT and designated as an FTO in February 2008.   Identifying Information:   Individual:              **HAFIZ ABDUR RAUF**AKA:                        Hafiz Abdul Raouf
AKA:                        Hafiz Abdul Rauf
DOB:                       March 25, 1973
POB:                       Sialkot, Punjab Province, Pakistan
Address 1:             Room No. 7, 4 Lake Road, Choburji, Lahore, Pakistan
Address 2:             Dola Khurd, Lahore, Pakistan
Address 3:             129 Jinnah Block Awan Town, Multan Road, Lahore, Pakistan 
Address 4:              33 Street No. 3, Jinnah Colony, Tehsil Kabir Wala, District Khanewal, Pakistan
Address 5:              5 Chamberlain Road, Lahore, Pakistan
Pakistan Computerized National Identity Card (CNIC): 35202-5400413-9 
Pakistan National Identity Card (NIC): 277-93-113495   Individual:                **MIAN ABDULLAH**AKA:                          Abu Sa'ad Shabir
AKA:                          Abu Saad Shabir
AKA:                          Abu Saad Shabbir
AKA:                          Ustad Shabir
DOB:                        1973
ALT. DOB:               1972
From:                        Bahawalpur, Punjab Province, Pakistan   Individual:               **MOHAMMAD NAUSHAD ALAM KHAN **AKA:                         Muhammad Nowshad Alam Khan 
AKA:                         Naushad Aalam Khan
AKA:                         Rahat Hasan Khan
DOB:                        August 1971
ALT. DOB:               December 1970
Passport 1:             Pakistan
Passport 2:             Bangladesh  ​
