---
title: Treasury Designates 10 Shipping Companies and Chief Executive Tied to IRISL and Irano Hind
date: 2011-12-20T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1388
---
*(Archived Content)*

**TREASURY DESIGNATES 10 SHIPPING COMPANIES  AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE TIED TO IRISL AND IRANO HIND WASHINGTON –** The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the designation of 10 shipping and front companies and one individual based in Malta affiliated with the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines (IRISL), an entity facing international sanctions for its involvement in Iran’s efforts to advance its missile programs and transport military cargoes. Today’s action is being taken as IRISL and its subsidiaries have increasingly relied upon multiple front companies and agents to overcome the impact of U.S. and international sanctions and increased scrutiny of their behavior.    “As IRISL and its subsidiaries continue their deceptive efforts to escape the grasp of U.S. and international sanctions, we will continue to take action—as we are today—to expose the front companies, agents and managers working with IRISL and work to stop this illicit business,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.   The entities and individual designated today are owned or controlled by, or acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, IRISL, Irano Hind, or ISI Maritime.   IRISL has facilitated shipments of military-related cargo destined for Iran’s Ministry of Defense and Armed Forces Logistics (MODAFL) and its subordinate entities, including organizations designated by the United States for sanctions pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13382 and listed in United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1737 in 2006, 1747 in 2007, and 1929 in 2010.  The Department of State designated MODAFL pursuant to E.O. 13382 in October 2007, and the Treasury Department designated IRISL in September 2008.   In September 2009, the Treasury Department also designated the IRISL-Shipping Corporation of India joint venture, Irano Hind.  The UN Security Council designated Irano Hind in Resolution 1929 in 2010.   Pursuant to E.O. 13382 – which is aimed at freezing the assets of proliferators of weapons of mass destruction and their supporters, excluding them from the U.S. financial and commercial systems – Treasury today designated:  
- 10 Malta-based IRISL and Irano Hind affiliated shipping companies:BIIS Maritime Limited, ISIM Amin Limited, ISIM Atr Limited, ISIM Olive Limited, ISIM Sat Limited, ISIM Sea Chariot Limited, ISIM Sea Crescent Limited, ISIM Sinin Limited, ISIM Taj Mahal Limited, and ISIM Tour Limited.
- The Chief Executive and Managing Director of Irano Hind, Jamshid Khalili, who is an Iranian national.
  The European Union also sanctioned these companies, per Council Decision 2011/783/CFSP of December 1, 2011, as IRISL front companies.    **IRISL Affiliated Entities**   1. BIIS MARITIME LIMITED, 147/1 St. Lucia Street, Valletta, VLT 1185, Malta; c/o Irano Hind Shipping Company, PO Box 15875, Mehrshad Street, Sadaghat Street, Opposite of Park Mellat, Vali-e-Asr Ave., Tehran, Iran; Business Registration Document # C31530 (Malta); Website www.iranohind.com [NPWMD]   2. ISIM AMIN LIMITED, 147/1 St. Lucia Street, Valletta, VLT 1185, Malta; Business Registration Document # C40069 (Malta) [NPWMD]   3. ISIM ATR LIMITED, c/o Irano Hind Shipping Company, PO Box 15875, Mershad Street, Sadaghat Street, Opposite of Park Mellat, Vali-e-Asr Ave., Tehran, Iran; 147/1 St. Lucia Street, Valletta, VLT 1185, Malta; Business Registration Document # C34477 (Malta); Website www.iranohind.com [NPWMD]   4. ISIM OLIVE LIMITED, 147/1 St. Lucia Street, Valletta, VLT 1185, Malta; Business Registration Document # C34479 (Malta) [NPWMD]   5. ISIM SAT LIMITED, 147/1 St. Lucia Street, Valletta, VLT 1185, Malta; Business Registration Document # C34476 (Malta) [NPWMD]   6. ISIM SEA CHARIOT LIMITED, 147/1 St. Lucia Street, Valletta, VLT 1185, Malta; Business Registration Document # C45153 (Malta) [NPWMD]   7. ISIM SEA CRESCENT LIMITED, 147/1 St. Lucia Street, Valletta, VLT 1185, Malta; Business Registration Document # C45152 (Malta) [NPWMD]   8. ISIM SININ LIMITED, 147/1 St. Lucia Street, Valletta, VLT  1185, Malta; c/o Irano Hind Shipping Company, PO Box 15875,Mehrshad Street, Sadaghat Street, Opposite of Park Mellat, Vali-e-Asr Ave., Tehran, Iran; Business Registration Document # C37437 (Malta); Website www.iranohind.com [NPWMD]   9. ISIM TAJ MAHAL LIMITED, 147/1 St. Lucia Street, Valletta, VLT 1185, Malta; Business Registration Document # C41660 (Malta) [NPWMD]   10. ISIM TOUR LIMITED, 147/1 St. Lucia Street, Valletta, VLT 1185, Malta; Business Registration Document # C34478 (Malta) [NPWMD]**IRISL Affiliated Individual**   1. KHALILI, Jamshid, Third Floor, Number 143, Dr. Lavasani Avenue, Farmanieh Avenue, Tehran, Iran; DOB 23 Sep 1957; nationality Iran; Passport R1451357 (Iran) (individual) [NPWMD]   ###​
