---
title: Jenni R. LeCompte Confirmed As Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs
date: 2011-07-01
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1227
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – Jenni R. LeCompte was confirmed by the United States Senate late Thursday to serve as the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs. In this role, LeCompte will lead the Office of Public Affairs, which is responsible for developing and implementing communications strategy for the Department and advising officials within the Department and its bureaus on how best to communicate with the American people on issues and priorities of public interest.   “Jenni combines relentless drive with great skill in the craft of communications.  She has been a critical part of the team from the very beginning of the President's efforts to restore economic growth,” said Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner.   LeCompte most recently served as the Deputy Assistant Secretary, Public Affairs Operations at Treasury, where she has worked since January 2009.   In 2007 and 2008, she served as Deputy CEO for Public Affairs for the Democratic National Convention Committee (DNCC). Prior to her work for the DNCC, LeCompte was the Director of Communications for the Recording Industry Association of America. Previously, she served as Regional Communications Director for the Kerry-Edwards for President campaign, and during the 2004 presidential cycle, served as Deputy Communications Director for the Democratic National Convention in Boston and as a press secretary for the Edwards for President campaign during the primaries.  Before that, she worked on Capitol Hill in the communications offices of Senators Dick Durbin (D-Ill.) and Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) and in the White House press office during the Clinton Administration.    LeCompte holds a B.S. from Northwestern University, where she attended the Medill School of Journalism.
