---
title: Treasury Announces Marketable Borrowing Estimates
date: 2011-01-31
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1038
---
*(Archived Content)*

To View Sources and Uses table visit[link](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/01.31-Sources-and-Uses.pdf)



**Washington, D.C.**-- The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced its current estimates of net marketable borrowing for the January – March 2011 and the April – June 2011 quarters:


- During the January – March 2011 quarter, Treasury expects to issue $237 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-March cash balance of $65 billion, which includes $5 billion for the Supplementary Financing Program (SFP). This borrowing estimate is $194 billion lower than announced in November 2010. The decrease in borrowing relates primarily to a lower SFP balance.
- During the April – June 2011 quarter, Treasury expects to issue $299 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-June cash balance of $95 billion, which includes $5 billion for the SFP.


During the October – December 2010 quarter, Treasury issued $363 billion in net marketable debt, and ended the quarter with a cash balance of $343 billion, of which $200 billion was attributable to the SFP. In November 2010, Treasury estimated $362 billion in net marketable borrowing and assumed an end-of-December cash balance of $300 billion, which included an SFP balance of $200 billion. The higher cash balance resulted primarily from lower outlays.



Additional financing details relating to Treasury’s Quarterly Refunding will be released at 9:00 a.m. on Wednesday, February 2, 2011.



###
