---
title: Treasury Designates Tehran Prosecutor General, Basij Commander for Human Rights Abuses in Iran
date: 2011-02-23
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1076
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view a fact sheet on Executive Order 13553 visit link.*   **WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Departments of the Treasury and State today announced the designation of two Iranian officials, Abbas Jafari Dolatabadi, Tehran Prosecutor General, and Mohammed Reza Naqdi, commander of the IRGC’s Basij Forces, for being responsible for or complicit in serious human rights abuses in Iran since the June 2009 disputed presidential election.   Today’s action was taken pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13553, signed by President Obama in September 2010, to provide the United States with new tools to target human rights abuses engaged in by officials by the Government of Iran. As a result of today’s action, any property in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons in which the designees have an interest is blocked, and U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.  The designees are also subject to visa sanctions by the Department of State.    “Today’s designations highlight the complicity of two Iranian officials in significant human right abuses against the Iranian people, said OFAC Director Adam J. Szubin. Dolatabadi and Naqdi have no place in the international financial system.”   State Department Assistant Secretary for Democracy, Human Rights and Labor Michael Posner added, “Today's action underscores our enduring commitment to support Iranians seeking to exercise their universal rights and expresses our solidarity with victims of torture, persecution, and arbitrary detention.”** Abbas Jafari Dolatabadi** Abbas Jafari Dolatabadiwas appointed as Tehran Prosecutor General in August 2009.  Since his appointment, Dolatabadi’s office has indicted a large number of protesters, including individuals who took part in the December 2009 Ashura Day protests, which saw large scale clashes between demonstrators and security forces resulting in deaths and severe injuries.  His office has charged protesters with the charge of *Muharebeh*, or enmity against God, which carries a death sentence, and denied due process to those facing the death sentence.  His office has also targeted and arrested reformists, human rights activists, and members of the media, as part of a broad crackdown on the political opposition.   Some of the defendants were tried at Evin court, which had been recently created within the confines of the notorious Evin prison and whose creation Dolatabadi defended in March 2010.  In Evin prison, some of the defendants were held in solitary confinement, abused, and coerced into making false self-incriminating statements.   President Obama identified Dolatabadi’s predecessor,Saeed Mortazavi, for sanctions under E.O. 13553 by listing him in the Annex to the Order.   **Mohammed Reza Naqdi** As commander of the IRGC’s Basij Forces, Naqdi was responsible for or complicit in Basij abuses occurring in late 2009, including the violent response to the December 2009 Ashura Day protests, which resulted in up to 15 deaths and the arrests of hundreds of protesters.   Prior to his appointment as commander of the Basij in October 2009, Naqdi was the head of the intelligence unit of the Basij responsible for interrogating those arrested during the post-election crackdown and was in charge of an interrogation team at the Kahrizak detention center.  Naqdi extracted forced confessions from high-ranking reformist leaders that were broadcast on Iranian state-run television.  At least three demonstrators are reported to have died as a result of injuries sustained at the Kahrizak detention center.   Identifying Information:   Individual:** JAFARI DOLATABADI, Abbas** AKA:                           JA'AFARI DOLATABADI, Abbas AKA:                           JAFARI DOLAT-ABADI, Abbas AKA:                           JAFARI DOVLATABADI, Abbas AKA:                           JAFARI DOWLATABADI, Abbas AKA:                           JA'FARI-DOLATABADI, Abbas AKA:                           JAFARI-DOLATABADI, Abbas AKA:                           JA'FARI-DOWLATABADI, Abbas DOB:                          1953 Address:                    Tehran Revolutionary and Public Court, Office of Tehran Prosecutor, Arag Circle, Tehran, Iran   Individual:** NAQDI, Mohammad Reza** AKA:                           NAGHDI, Mohammad Reza AKA:                           NAQDI, Muhammad AKA:                           SHAMS, Mohammad Reza DOB:                          circa 1952 Alt DOB:                     circa Mar 1961 Alt DOB:                     circa Apr 1961 Alt DOB:                    1953 POB:                           Najaf, Iraq Alt POB:                     Tehran, Iran​
