---
title: Treasury’s Top National Security Officials Confirmed By United States Senate
date: 2011-07-01T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1228
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that David S. Cohen and Daniel L. Glaser were confirmed by the United States Senate to serve as Treasury’s Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence and Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing, respectively.   As Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence, Cohen will lead the Treasury Department’s policy, enforcement, regulatory, and intelligence functions aimed at identifying and disrupting the lines of financial support to international terrorist organizations, proliferators, narcotics traffickers, and other illicit actors posing a threat to our national security. He also will be responsible for directing the Department’s efforts to combat money laundering and financial crimes. In this role, Cohen will continue to serve as a member of the Obama Administration’s national security team in developing financial strategies to combat these wide ranging threats and protect the U.S. and international financial systems from abuse.   “David has played a central role in shaping the design of the very powerful sanctions regime that is denying terrorists and proliferators the ability to use the financial system to further their malicious aims,” said Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner.   Cohen was confirmed by the United States Senate on May 1, 2009 as Treasury’s Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing. In that role, he was responsible for formulating and coordinating the counterterrorist financing and anti-money laundering policies and strategies for the Department. He has been Acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence since February 2011.   Until February 2009, Cohen was a partner in the law firm of WilmerHale, where he focused on complex civil litigation, white collar criminal defense, internal investigations and anti-money laundering counseling.  Immediately prior to joining the firm in 2001, Cohen worked at the Treasury Department, where he served concurrently as Acting Deputy General Counsel and Associate Deputy General Counsel, and was a recipient of the Treasury Secretary’s Award for outstanding service. Cohen received his J.D. from Yale Law School, and his B.A., magna cum laude, from Cornell University.   Daniel L. Glaser was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on May 27, 2011 to serve as Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing in the Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.  As Assistant Secretary, Glaser will be responsible for helping to formulate and coordinate the counterterrorist financing and anti-money laundering policies and strategies for the Department. “Danny is one of the founding leaders of the Treasury Department's terrorism finance office and has helped make their work into one of the administration's most effective tools in the fight against terrorists, drug lords, and criminal regimes,” said Secretary Geithner.  Glaser has served as Treasury’s Deputy Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes since November 2004. He was responsible for developing and coordinating policies to protect the U.S. and international financial systems from abuse related to money laundering, terrorist financing, and the financing of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Glaser also served since 2001 as the Head of the U.S. Delegation to the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the premier international anti-money laundering and counterterrorism financing body.   Prior to that position, Glaser served as the first Director of the Treasury Department’s Executive Office of Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes and as Senior Counsel for Financial Crimes in the Office of the General Counsel. He also served as an attorney for the U.S. Secret Service. Glaser began his career as an associate in the law firm of Coudert Brothers. He is a graduate of the University of Michigan and the Columbia University School of Law.
