---
title: Treasury Targets the Financial And Support Networks of Al Qa’ida and the Taliban, Haqqani Network Leadership
date: 2011-02-09
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1055
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today targeted the financial and support networks of al-Qa’ida, the Taliban and the Haqqani Network leadership by designating Said Jan 'Abd Al-Salam and Khalil Al-Rahman Haqqani, two Afghan individuals, as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) under Executive Order (E.O.) 13224.  Al-Salam was designated for acting for or on behalf of al-Qa’ida and for providing support to the Taliban; and Haqqani was designated for acting for or on behalf of the Taliban, for providing support to al-Qa’ida and for acting for or on behalf of Sirajuddin Haqqani. As a result of today’s action, U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in any transactions with these individuals, and any assets they hold under U.S. jurisdiction are frozen.    “Khalil Al-Rahman Haqqani, who is among the Haqqani Network’s most important figures and fundraisers, and Said Jan 'Abd Al-Salam have engaged in activities in support of the Taliban and al-Qa’ida,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Stuart Levey.  “Today’s action exposes two consequential sources of financial and tactical support for these terrorist organizations and is part of a larger US and international effort to degrade their capabilities.”** Said Jan 'Abd Al-Salam** Said Jan 'Abd Al-Salam has provided funds to the Taliban and al-Qa’ida and has facilitated training and weapons acquisition for al-Qa’ida. In 2008, he collected thousands of dollars in financial donations for al-Qa’ida and the Taliban and in 2009 transferred funds to members of a Pakistani extremist group for al-Qa'ida. In 2007 and 2008, Al-Salam provided thousands of dollars to the Taliban in Wardak Province, Afghanistan.   In 2007, Al-Salam served as an al-Qa’ida commander’s primary assistant and facilitator and was tasked by an al-Qa’ida commander to procure weapons. Around 2005, Al-Salam ran a basic training camp for al-Qa’ida in Pakistan. In addition, he hosted individuals who sought to participate in weapons and explosives training and al-Qa'ida indoctrination.   Al-Salam has also served as an interlocutor between al-Qa’ida and the Taliban. In response to a 2006 order from an al-Qa’ida commander, Al-Salam contacted Taliban-affiliated individuals and the following year passed a message from an al-Qa’ida commander to a senior Taliban member.** Khalil Al-Rahman Haqqani**A senior member of the Haqqani Network, Khalil Haqqani engages in fundraising activities on behalf of the Taliban and provides support to the Taliban operating in Afghanistan. As of early 2010, he provided funds to Taliban cells in Logar Province, Afghanistan. In 2009, Khalil Haqqani was one of several people responsible for the detention of enemy prisoners captured by the Taliban and the Haqqani Network. Khalil Haqqani has taken orders for Taliban operations from his nephew Sirajuddin Haqqani, who was designated by the U.S. in March 2008 pursuant to E.O. 13224.   Khalil Haqqani has also acted on behalf of al-Qa’ida and has been linked to al-Qa’ida military operations. In 2002, he was deploying men to reinforce al-Qa’ida elements in Paktia Province, Afghanistan.** The Haqqani Network** The Haqqani Network is a Taliban-affiliated militant group operating from Pakistan. At the forefront of insurgent activity in Afghanistan, the Haqqani Network was founded by Khalil Haqqani’s brother, Jalaluddin Haqqani, who joined Mullah Omar’s Taliban regime in the mid-1990s. Jalaluddin Haqqani was designated by the UN 1267 Committee in January 2001.   Khalil Haqqani is also a fundraiser for the Haqqani Network, often travelling internationally to meet with financial supporters.  As of September 2009, Khalil Haqqani had traveled to Dubai, United Arab Emirates and had raised funds from sources there, as well as from sources in Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Iran and China.   Identifying Information:   Individual:** Said Jan 'Abd Al-Salam** AKA:                          Sa’id Jan 'Abd-al-Salam AKA:                          Qazi 'Abdallah AKA:                          Qazi Abdullah AKA:                          Ibrahim Walid AKA:                          Dilawar Khan Zain Khan AKA:                          Qasi Sa'id Jan AKA:                          Said Jhan AKA:                          Farhan Khan AKA:                           Aziz Cairo AKA:                           Nangiali DOB:                          February 5, 1981 Alt. DOB:                    January 1, 1972 Nationality:                Afghan Passport:                  Afghanistan, #OR801168; Issued February 28, 2006;                                     Expires February 27, 2011 (under name Said Jan 'Abd al-Salam) Alt Passport:             Pakistan, #4117921; Issued September 9, 2008;                                     Expires September 9, 2013 (under name Dilawar Khan Zain Khan) ID:                               Kuwait Civil Identification #281020505755                                     (under name Said Jan 'Abd al-­Salam)   Individual:** Khalil Al-Rahman Haqqani** AKA:                           Khalil ur Rahman Haqqani AKA:                           Khaleel Haqqani AKA:                           Khalil Ahmad Haqqani DOB:                          January 1, 1966 Alt. DOB:                   1958 – 1964 Nationality:                Afghan Address:                    Peshawar, Pakistan Alt. Address:              Near Dirgha Mundei Madrassa in Dirgha Mundei Village,                                     near Miram Shah, North Waziristan Agency (NWA), Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), Pakistan Alt. Address:              Kayla Village, near Miram Shah, NWA, FATA, Pakistan Alt. Address:              Sarana Zadran Village, Paktia Province, Afghanistan​
