---
title: Moving to Further Isolate Qadhafi Regime, Treasury Designates Libyan Foreign Minister and Identifies 16 State-Owned Companies
date: 2011-03-15T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1104
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – Taking further steps to isolate the Qadhafi regime, the U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the designation of Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa as well as the identification of 16 entities in Libya’s banking, oil, aviation and investment sectors as being owned or controlled by the Government of Libya.   Moussa Koussa, who is currently Libya’s Foreign Minister and served previously as the Head of Libya’s Intelligence Agency, was designated pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13566, which targets, among others, senior officials of the Government of Libya. As a result of today’s designation, any assets of Koussa subject to U.S. jurisdiction are frozen, and U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in business with him.    “Today’s designation of Moussa Koussa builds on the strong steps taken by the United States to apply targeted, financial pressure on the Qadhafi regime,” said Acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen. “The identification of state-owned companies furthers Libya’s isolation from the U.S. financial system.”    E.O. 13566 also blocks all property and interests in property of the Government of Libya and its agencies, instrumentalities and controlled entities.  To assist U.S. persons and others in identifying state-owned entities, Treasury today identified the following list of entities as being owned or controlled by the Government of Libya:  
1. Afriqiyah Airways
2. National Oil Corporation
3. Libya Investment Authority
4. Libya Africa Investment Portfolio
5. Libyan African Investment Company
6. Libyan Arab Foreign Investment Company
7. Libya Arab Foreign Bank
8. Economic and Social Development Fund Company
9. Gomhouria Bank
10. Al Wafa Bank
11. Agricultural Bank
12. National Commercial Bank
13. National Banking Corporation
14. Sahara Bank
15. Savings and Real Estate Investment Bank
16. First Gulf Libyan Bank
Identifying information:   **Individual:                Moussa KOUSSA**AKA:                          Mousa KOUSA AKA:                          Musa KUSA AKA:                          MUSSA KUSSA DOB:                         Circa 1949​
