---
title: Treasury Department Announces Public Offerings of Warrants to Purchase Common Stock of Citigroup Inc.
date: 2011-01-24T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1033
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** -- The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that it has commenced a secondary public offering of 255,033,142 warrants to purchase the common stock of Citigroup Inc. (the “Company”) (the “A Warrants”) and a secondary public offering of 210,084,034 warrants to purchase the common stock of the Company (the “B Warrants”). The proceeds of this sale will provide an additional return to the American taxpayer from Treasury’s investment in the Company beyond the dividend payments it received on the related preferred stock and the profit received from the sale of shares of common stock and trust preferred securities of the Company. The offerings are expected to price through a modified Dutch auction. Deutsche Bank Securities Inc. is the sole book-running manager and Cabrera Capital Markets, LLC and Loop Capital Markets LLC are the co-managers for the offerings.   Deutsche Bank Securities Inc., in its capacity as auction agent, has specified that the auctions will commence at 8:00 a.m., Eastern Time, on January 25, 2011, and will close at 6:30 p.m., Eastern Time, on that same day (the “submission deadline”). During the auction period, potential bidders for the A Warrants will be able to place bids at any price (in increments of $0.01) at or above the minimum bid price of $0.60 per warrant, and potential bidders for the B Warrants will be able to place bids at any price (in increments of $0.01) at or above the minimum bid price of $0.15 per warrant.   The auction procedures, and the applicable exercise prices, expirations, and other terms of the warrants are described in the preliminary prospectus supplements referenced below.   The warrants are being offered pursuant to an effective shelf registration statement that has been filed by the Company with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). Preliminary prospectus supplements related to the offerings will be filed by the Company with the SEC and will be available on the SEC’s website at [http://www.sec.gov](http://www.sec.gov/). Copies of the final prospectus supplements relating to these securities may be obtained, when available, from Deutsche Bank Securities Inc., Prospectus Department, Harborside Financial Center, 100 Plaza One, Jersey City, New Jersey 07311-3988, telephone: 1-800-503-4611, or by emailing [prospectus.cpdg@db.com](mailto:prospectus.cpdg@db.com).   This news release shall not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy, nor shall there be any sale of these securities in any state or jurisdiction in which such offer, solicitation or sale would be unlawful prior to registration or qualification under the securities laws of any such state or jurisdiction. ​
