---
title: U.S. Department of the Treasury, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Ad Council Launch New PSAs to Prompt Homeowners Who Are Facing Mortgage Trouble to Reach Out for Help
date: 2011-09-14T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1296
---
*(Archived Content)*

*New Ads Drive Struggling Homeowners to Call 888-995-HOPE and Go to MakingHomeAffordable.gov Website As Part of Ongoing Campaign*   WASHINGTON, DC, September 14, 2011 - The Ad Council, in partnership with the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), have joined together to launch a new phase of their Foreclosure Prevention Assistance Public Service Advertising (PSA) Campaign. The campaign aims to increase awareness of the Making Home Affordable® Program’s free resources and assistance for homeowners who are struggling with their mortgage payments.   One in 11 homeowners nationwide has missed two or more mortgage payments. Many struggling homeowners delay conversations about their mortgage concerns and enter foreclosure without ever reaching out for assistance. The new PSAs notify homeowners facing mortgage trouble that options other than foreclosure are available, and the sooner they act, the more options they have for the best possible outcome.   The Foreclosure Prevention Assistance campaign encourages homeowners to call 888-995-HOPE (4673) to speak one-on-one with a HUD-approved housing expert to discuss the solutions that are available based on their individual circumstances. In addition, the program website, MakingHomeAffordable.gov, serves as an online resource for struggling homeowners to learn about options other than foreclosure.   Created pro bono by Schafer Condon Carter, a Chicago-based advertising agency, the new television, radio, print, out of home, and online PSAs have been created in English and Spanish. The PSAs aim to inspire homeowners who are unsure of where to turn to reach out for help as soon as possible.   “The Making Home Affordable Program has already assisted over a million homeowners, said HUD Secretary Shaun Donovan. Housing counselors are ready to continue their work with homeowners to discuss specific solutions for their mortgage problems.  Struggling homeowners do not need to work through their concerns alone. The key is encouraging homeowners to pick up the phone now to explore their options.”   Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner added:  “While the housing market is still distressed, the Administration’s programs have helped establish better standards for the mortgage industry.  As a result, struggling homeowners have more options today than ever before. We are continuing to do everything we can to help stabilize the market and to ease the burden on struggling homeowners. And that includes working to make sure families and individuals know about the resources available to them.”   “We are proud to continue our partnership with Treasury and HUD on this critical issue of home foreclosures that affects so many Americans,” said Peggy Conlon, president and CEO, the Ad Council.  “We are confident that these new PSAs will resonate with homeowners struggling with their mortgages and encourage them to call 888-995-HOPE or visit the website to learn what they can do to prevent foreclosure.”   “All of us at Schafer Condon Carter have been honored to work with the Ad Council and its sponsors at Treasury and HUD on the Making Home Affordable campaign,” said David Selby, president of Schafer Condon Carter. “We know that the financial burdens currently facing many homeowners are paralyzing. We’ve captured this emotion with a creative treatment that shows people frozen in time while the world goes on around them.  Speaking directly to these homeowners is key in getting them to get the help they need as soon as possible.”   The Ad Council will distribute the new PSAs to more than 33,000 media outlets nationwide.  The new advertisements build on the successful nationwide campaign first launched between Treasury, HUD and the Ad Council in the summer of 2010. The PSAs will air in advertising space donated by the media.     **The Advertising Council ** The Ad Council (www.adcouncil.org) is a private, non-profit organization that marshals talent from the advertising and communications industries, the facilities of the media and the resources of the business and non-profit communities to produce, distribute and promote public service campaigns on behalf of non-profit organizations and government agencies.  The Ad Council addresses issue areas such as improving the quality of life for children, preventive health, education, community well-being, environmental preservation and strengthening families.** Schafer Condon Carter ** Schafer Condon Carter is Chicago's top independent mid-size advertising agency and one of the fastest growing shops in the United States. SCC has built its success by challenging the status quo and delivering a tightly orchestrated, fully-integrated brand vision for its clients across an infinite set of consumer touch points. A simple mission drives the agency’s entrepreneurial spirit and aggressive, growth-oriented culture: “Think Again.” SCC’s client roster includes: Allen Edmonds, Armour Eckrich, Beam Global Spirits & Wine, Brach’s, Brunswick, ConAgra Foods, General Mills, Land O’Lakes, National Pork Board, New Chapter, optionsXpress, Rotary international, and Solo Cup. The agency’s wholly owned network includes SCC|Grossman Public Relations and SCC|Digital. For more information visit www.sccadv.com.   ###
