---
title: Treasury Announces Marketable Borrowing Estimates
date: 2011-10-31T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1342
---
*(Archived Content)*

*To view the Sources and Uses Table, visit link*

**Washington, D.C.  --** The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced its current estimates of net marketable borrowing for the October – December 2011 and the January - March 2012 quarters:

- During the October – December 2011 quarter, Treasury expects to issue $305 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-December cash balance of $60 billion.  This borrowing estimate is $21 billion higher than announced in July 2011.  The increase in borrowing relates to lower receipts, higher outlays, and changes in the cash balance assumptions partially offset by higher net issuances of State and Local Government Series securities.
 
- During the January - March 2012 quarter, Treasury expects to issue $541 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-March cash balance of $60 billion.

During the July - September 2011 quarter, Treasury issued $286 billion in net marketable debt, and ended the quarter with a cash balance of $58 billion.  In July 2011, Treasury estimated $331 billion in net marketable borrowing and assumed an end-of-September cash balance of $110 billion.  The decrease in borrowing was related to lower receipts offset by lower outlays and cash balance adjustments that lowered the estimated end-of-quarter cash balance.

Additional financing details relating to Treasury’s Quarterly Refunding will be released at 9:00 a.m. on Wednesday, November 2, 2011.

###
