---
title: Treasury to Begin Sales of Its Small Business Administration (SBA) 7(a) Securities Portfolio
date: 2011-06-02
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1198
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – Today, the United States Department of the Treasury announced its intention to begin the disposition of the Small Business Administration (SBA) 7(a) securities portfolio over time through multiple sales.  The timing and pace of these sales will be subject to market conditions.    Treasury originally invested in 31 SBA 7(a) securities with a value of approximately $368 million.  Those securities were comprised of 1,001 loans from 17 different industries, including retail, food services, manufacturing, scientific and technical services, healthcare, educational services, and others.    Treasury acquired its SBA 7(a) securities portfolio through the Troubled Asset Relief Program’s (TARP) Consumer and Business Lending Initiative (CBLI).  From March through September of 2010, Treasury made open market purchases from participating pool assemblers of SBA 7(a) securities backed by the guaranteed portion of SBA loans.  In so doing, Treasury injected liquidity into this market to help restart the flow of credit, enabling pool assemblers to purchase additional small business loans from loan originators.  SBA 7(a) loans finance a wide-range of small business needs, including working capital, machinery, equipment, furniture, and fixtures.   The disposition of these SBA 7(a) securities is part of Treasury’s ongoing efforts to wind down TARP.  The Obama Administration will continue its strong commitment to ensuring that small businesses have the capital they need to create jobs and strengthen economic growth through the implementation of the Small Business Jobs Act and a number of other critical programs.   EARNEST Partners, which has acted as Treasury’s Financial Agent for the SBA 7(a) securities portfolio, will execute the securities disposition on behalf of Treasury.  Prospective purchasers of SBA 7(a) securities held by Treasury should contact EARNEST Partners by e-mailing UCSBTeam@earnestpartners.com or by calling (404) 815-8772.​
