---
title: Treasury Announces Intent to Sell Warrant Positions in Private Sales
date: 2011-11-08
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1356
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** - The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced its intention to dispose of certain warrant positions received in consideration for investments made under the Capital Purchase Program (CPP). At some point during the next several weeks, Treasury intends to conduct an auction to sell, in private transactions principally involving qualified institutional buyers, its warrant positions in a number of financial institutions that will be identified prior to the commencement of the auction.   Each of the financial institutions whose warrants may be privately placed via the auction has fully repurchased Treasury´s preferred stock investment. The proceeds of these sales will provide an additional return to the American taxpayer from Treasury´s investments in these financial institutions beyond the dividend payments it received on the related preferred stock.   Treasury intends to sell these warrant positions through private transactions. These sales will be executed using an auction to establish a clearing price for each warrant position by allowing appropriately qualified bidders to submit bids at or above a minimum price specified for each warrant position. Each warrant position will be sold to a single winning bidder. Treasury expects to conduct similar auctions in the future for other warrant positions it holds in financial institutions that have repaid CPP.   The warrants that will be the subject of the auction have not been and will not be registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Act”), and may not be offered or sold in the United States or to, or for the benefit of, U.S. persons absent registration under, or an applicable exemption from, the registration requirements of the Act and applicable state securities law.  Accordingly, the warrants will be offered in private transactions only to (1) “qualified institutional buyers” as defined in Rule 144A under the Act, (2) the issuer and (3) a limited number of “accredited investors” affiliated with the issuer.  This press release does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy the warrants or any other security (including the underlying shares of common stock), and shall not constitute an offer, solicitation or sale in any jurisdiction in which, or to any persons to whom, such offering, solicitation or sale would be unlawful.​
