---
title: Cyrus Amir-Mokri Confirmed as Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions
date: 2011-11-01T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1345
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – Cyrus Amir-Mokri was confirmed by the United States Senate yesterday evening to serve as the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions. As Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions, Mr. Amir-Mokri is responsible for developing and coordinating Treasury's policies on issues affecting financial institutions.   Cyrus Amir-Mokri most recently served as Senior Counsel to the Chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), where he also was the agency’s deputy representative to the Financial Stability Oversight Council.   “Cyrus Amir-Mokri has a wealth of experience in financial regulatory issues, including his work at the CFTC helping to secure historic financial reform,” said Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner. “He will be a valuable asset at Treasury as we continue the important work of implementing those critical reforms and as we move forward with other key initiatives that will help improve the strength and resiliency of the financial markets.”   Prior to joining the CFTC, Mr. Amir-Mokri was a partner at the law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP.  His practice focused on complex securities and antitrust litigation.  He has also clerked for the Honorable Bruce M. Selya of the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit.   Mr. Amir-Mokri received a J.D. from the University of Chicago Law School, a Ph.D. in History from the University of Chicago, and an A.B. in Biochemistry from Harvard College.
