---
title: Treasury’s Office of Financial Research Announces Advisory Committee
date: 2012-03-22
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1501
---
*(Archived Content)*

​**** **WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of Treasury’s Office of Financial Research (OFR) announced plans today to create the Financial Research Advisory Committee (“the Committee”).  The Committee will provide advice, recommendations, analysis, and information to the OFR.  


The OFR was launched after enactment of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act to serve the Financial Stability Oversight Council, its member agencies, and the public by improving the quality, transparency, and accessibility of financial data and information, by conducting and sponsoring research related to financial stability, and by promoting best practices in risk management.  Members of the Financial Research Advisory Committee will include distinguished academics, researchers, industry leaders, government officials, and experts in the fields of data and technology.  The Committee will serve as a valuable resource that will broaden the OFR’s analytical perspective and provide a critical link to diverse knowledge, experience, and perspectives.



Committee members will be selected based on their expertise in economics, financial institutions and markets, statistical analysis, financial markets analysis, econometrics, applied sciences, risk management, data information standards, technology, or other areas related to OFR’s duties and authorities.  Subcommittees will be formed to address research issues and data and technology issues, two distinct, but related areas.



A Notice of Establishment of the Financial Research Advisory Committee has been delivered to the Federal Register.  The Notice seeks applications for membership on the Committee.  The application period will be open through April 16, 2012.



A copy of the Notice of Establishment of the Financial Research Advisory Committee can be found[here](https://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2012/03/22/2012-6941/financial-research-advisory-committee).



###

​
