---
title: Treasury Designates Ibarra Cardona Drug Trafficking Organization
date: 2012-11-20T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1778
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Action Targets Major Methamphetamine Precursor Import Network WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today designated five individuals and three entities operating out of Tijuana, Mexico as Specially Designated Narcotics Traffickers (SDNTs) pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act).  OFAC designated Luis Gerardo Ibarra Cardona, the leader of a methamphetamine precursor import network which is responsible for supplying multiple tons of methamphetamine precursor material to the Sinaloa Cartel.  In July 2009, Mexican authorities arrested Luis Gerardo Ibarra Cardona, andSubprocuraduría de Investigación Especializada en Delincuencia Organizada(SEIDO) charged Luis Gerardo Ibarra Cardona with the unlawful acquisition and procurement of ephedrine, a precursor used in the manufacture of methamphetamine.

“Today’s designation of the Ibarra Cardona family and business network will significantly impair this organization’s ability to import methamphetamine precursor material from the United States and will disrupt the Sinaloa Cartel’s methamphetamine precursor supply chain,” said OFAC Director Adam J. Szubin.

In addition to Luis Gerardo Ibarra Cardona, the network is comprised of his family members, including his father, Jose Gerardo Ibarra Favila, mother, Mayela Cardona Martinez, brother, Carlos Jesus Ivan Ibarra Cardona, and uncle, Pedro Cardona Martinez, all of whom were designated today.  Additionally, the network operates three distributor companies, Distribuidora Germay S.A. de C.V., Distribuidora Germay de Sonora, S.A. DE C.V., and Comercializadora Cacho S.A. de C.V., all three of which are designated today.

Today’s action is the latest in a series of efforts by OFAC to thwart transnational drug cartels.  The Sinaloa Cartel is responsible for distributing significant amounts of cocaine, marijuana, and methamphetamine to the United States.  President Obama identified the Sinaloa Cartel as a significant foreign narcotics trafficker under the Kingpin Act in April 2009.

Today’s action, supported by the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, U.S. Customs and Border Protection Joint Field Command Arizona, and the U.S. State Department Bureau of Diplomatic Security, is part of OFAC’s ongoing efforts under the Kingpin Act to apply financial measures against significant foreign narcotics traffickers worldwide.  Internationally, OFAC has designated more than 1,200 businesses and individuals linked to 97 drug kingpins since June 2000.  Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties.  Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines of up to $5 million.  Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million. Other individuals face up to 10 years in prison and fines for criminal violation of the Kingpin Act pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code.

*View a chart of the Ibarra organization.​​​ *

 

###

​​​
