---
title: 'Treasury Targets Business Associate of Muammar Qadhafi''s Son'
date: 2012-10-18T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1742
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Action Targets Dalene Sanders for Providing Support and Services to Saadi Qadhafi WASHINGTON –** The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated Dalene Sanders for providing support and services to Saadi Qadhafi, son of former Libyan leader Muammar Qadhafi.  Saadi Qadhafi is currently believed to be in Niger and he was designated pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13566 on March 11, 2011.  The United Nations also imposed sanctions on Saadi Qadhafi on March 17, 2011 in United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973.  Dalene Sanders is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13566 because she has provided financial and material support to, as well as services in support of, Saadi Qadhafi.  Additionally, Dalene Sanders is being designated for acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of Saadi Qadhafi.

“Today’s designation of a key, ongoing supporter of Saadi Qadhafi reflects the United States government’s steadfast commitment to a free and democratic Libya.  We are determined to oppose all those who seek to foster violence, fear, or instability in Libya, and we will continue to support efforts to prevent funds belonging to the Libyan people from being misused,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.

SaadiQadhafi has called for an uprising against the democratically-elected Libyan government and has threatened to return to Libya to carry on his father’s brutal legacy.  Additionally, he has claimed to be in contact with a number of people who are willing to help him with his revolt.  Saadi Qadhafi’s ongoing activities and the potential misuse of resources at his disposal pose a direct threat to Libya’s democratic transition.

Dalene Sanders has been working to move money out of bank accounts held in Uganda on instruction from Saadi Qadhafi.  In February 2012, Dalene Sanders also met with Ugandan officials to discuss asylum in Uganda for Saadi Qadhafi.

On March 1, 2011, President Obama declared a national emergency with respect to Libya in E.O. 13566.  This authority targets Muammar Qadhafi, his government, his family, and his close associates for being involved in the commission of human rights abuses related to political repression in Libya.

The U.S. government continues to work to support Libya’s security and democratic transition.  In this regard, today’s action seeks to prevent Libyan state assets from being misappropriated by Qadhafi’s family members or close associates to threaten the democratically-elected government.  As a result of today’s designation, U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with Dalene Sanders and any assets she may have under U.S. jurisdiction are frozen.

 

**Identifying Information:**

Individual:      Dalene Sanders

DOB:              14 December 1970

National ID:    7012140235084 (South Africa)

Citizenship:     South Africa

###​

               ​​​
