---
title: Treasury Designates Hizballah Leadership
date: 2012-09-13T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1709
---
*(Archived Content)*

*Actions Target Secretary General Hasan Nasrallah’s Support to the *

*Assad Regime and Hizballah Senior Officials*

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today imposed sanctions against Hizballah's leadership in Lebanon, further exposing Hizballah’s active support to the regime of Syrian President Bashar Assad, as well as its role in terrorist activities.

Hasan Nasrallah, Hizballah's Secretary General, is being designated today pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13582, for providing support to the Syrian government.  Mustafa Badr Al-Din and Talal Hamiyah, two senior terrorist leaders of Hizballah, are being designated today pursuant to E.O. 13224, for providing support to Hizballah’s terrorist activities in the Middle East and around the world.

“By aiding Assad’s violent campaign against the Syrian people and working to support a regime that will inevitably fall, Hizballah’s ongoing activity undermines regional stability and poses a direct threat to Lebanon’s security,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “Hizballah’s actions, overseen by Hasan Nasrallah and executed by Mustafa Badr Al-Din and Talal Hamiyah, clearly reveal its true nature as a terrorist and criminal organization.”

Hizballah and its leader Hasan Nasrallah have sought to depict their organization as a social and political party, as well as a resistance movement.  These efforts are belied by the facts:  Hizballah consistently uses terrorism against civilian targets to achieve its goals, and this trend has only increased recently.  The last year has witnessed Hizballah’s most aggressive terrorist plotting outside the Middle East since the 1990s.  Moreover, in recent months Hizballah has also played an increasingly active role in providing support to the Government of Syria, further enabling the regime to carry out its bloody campaign against the Syrian people.

Under the Assad regime, Syria has been a longstanding supporter of Hizballah -- providing safe haven to Hizballah and routing weapons, in many cases from Iran, to Hizballah in Lebanon.  Hizballah, under the direction of Nasrallah, is now returning the favor by providing training, advice, and extensive logistical support to the Government of Syria as the Assad regime continues to wreak havoc on the Syrian people through the use of terror and violence -- Hizballah’s area of expertise.

Today’s designations build upon a number of actions that the U.S. government has taken against Hizballah over the years for its support for terrorism and its role in supporting the violence being perpetrated by the Assad regime against the Syrian people.  Hizballah was designated for its support to the Government of Syria pursuant to E.O. 13582 in August 2012.  It was also named a Specially Designated Global Terrorist pursuant to E.O. 13224 in October 2001, and listed in the Annex to E.O. 12947 as a Specially Designated Terrorist (SDT) in January 1995.  Hasan Nasrallah was designated pursuant to E.O. 12947 in January 1995.

**Hasan Nasrallah**Since the beginning of the Syrian people's courageous campaign in early 2011 to secure their universal rights, Hizballah Secretary-General Hasan Nasrallah has overseen Hizballah’s efforts to help the Syrian regime’s violent crackdown on the Syrian civilian population by providing training, advice, and extensive logistical support to the Government of Syria.  Hizballah has directly trained Syrian government personnel inside Syria and has facilitated the training of Syrian forces by Iran's terrorist arm, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-Qods Force (IRGC-QF).  Also under Nasrallah, Hizballah has played a substantial role in efforts to expel Syrian opposition forces from areas within Syria and coordinated its support to the Government of Syria with IRGC-QF and senior Syrian government officials. Indeed, under the direction of Nasrallah, Hizballah since mid-2012 has escalated its support to the Government of Syria.**Mustafa Badr Al-Din**Mustafa Badr Al-Din is a senior Hizballah official who is believed to have replaced his cousin, Imad Mughniyah, as Hizballah's top militant commander after Mughniyah's 2008 death.  In June 2011, the prosecutor of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon charged Mustafa Badr Al-Din with the attack on February 14, 2005 that killed former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri and 21 others.**Talal Hamiyah**Talal Hamiyah is the head of Hizballah's External Security Organization (ESO), which maintains organized cells worldwide.  The ESO is the Hizballah element responsible for the planning, coordination, and execution of terrorist attacks outside of Lebanon.**Identifying Information Individual:  Mustafa Badr Al Din**AKA:  Badreddine, Mustafa Youssef

AKA:  Badreddine, Mustafa Amine

AKA:  Saab, Elias Fouad

AKA:  Sa'b, Ilyas

AKA:  Issa, Sami

AKA:  Dhu Al-Fiqar

DOB:  April 06, 1961

POB:   Al-Ghobeiry, Beirut, Lebanon

 

**Individual:  Talal Hamiyah**AKA: Talal Husni Hamiyah

AKA: Ismat Mezarani

DOB No. 1: 27 Nov 1952

DOB No. 2: 5 March 1958

DOB No. 3: 18 March 1960

DOB No. 4: 8 December 1958

POB No. 1: Taria, Lebanon

POB No. 2: Tarayya, Lebanon

POB No. 3: Sojad, Lebanon

Citizenship: Lebanese

Nationality: Lebanese

 

**Individual:  Hasan Nasrallah**AKA:  Nasrallah, Hasan Abd-al-Karim

DOB No. 1:  31 Aug 1960

DOB No. 2:  31 Aug 1953

DOB No. 3:  31 Aug 1955

DOB No. 4:  31 Aug 1958

POB:  Al Basuriyah, Lebanon

Passport:  042833 (Lebanon)

Title:  Secretary-General of Hizballah

###
