---
title: Treasury Sanctions Members of the Camorra
date: 2012-08-01
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1666
---
*(Archived Content)*



*Action Targets Major Transnational Criminal Organization*



**WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated five key leaders of the Camorra, one of Europe's largest criminal organizations, under its authority to impose sanctions targeting transnational organized crime. The Camorra is involved in money laundering, extortion, alien smuggling, robbery, blackmail, kidnapping, political corruption, and counterfeiting around the world.  It is one of four transnational criminal organizations (TCOs) specifically identified by the President for sanctions under E.O. 13581 (Blocking Property of Transnational Criminal Organizations), along with the Brothers’ Circle, the Yakuza, and the Zetas.  The Camorra leaders designated today are Antonio Iovine, Michele Zagaria, Mario Caterino, Paolo Di Mauro, and Giuseppe Dell’Aquila, all leaders or senior members of Camorra clans. Each of these five individuals is designated for acting for or on behalf of, or providing support to, the Camorra.



President Obama identified the Camorra as a significant TCO in the Annex to E.O. 13581 on July 24, 2011, and charged the Treasury Department with pursuing additional sanctions against its members and supporters. Drawing on this authority, the Treasury Department is taking action against the Camorra by identifying and designating these five key leaders. Today’s action freezes any assets they may have within the jurisdiction of the United States and prohibits any transactions with them by U.S. persons. These efforts protect the U.S. financial system from transnational criminal organizations and expose and disrupt the actions of individuals who are supporting or acting for or on behalf of the Camorra.



“This action is designed to squeeze the Camorra out of the global financial system and protect the U.S. financial system from laundering of its criminal proceeds.  We will continue to pursue members and supporters of the Camorra, and today’s action against the group’s leadership will help us cast an even larger net to expose their financial facilitators and associates wherever they may operate,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.



The Camorra operates internationally and is involved in serious criminal activity, such as counterfeiting and narcotics trafficking. In March 2012 more than a billion dollars worth of Camorra assets reportedly were seized by Italian law enforcement.



Mario Caterino is a Camorra clan leader, identified at the time of his arrest in May 2011 as the second in command of the Casalesi clan. He is serving a life sentence in Italy for conspiracy and murder.



Giuseppe Dell’Aquila is described as the head of the Mallardo clan. He is believed to have played a key role in investing in and managing Camorra holding companies. Arrested in Italy in May 2011, he is serving a sentence for conspiracy, money laundering, robbery, and the receipt of stolen goods.



Paolo di Mauro was the third most wanted fugitive in Italy at the time of his arrest in Spain in January 2010. He is a leader of the Contini clan and is currently serving a 17-year sentence for conspiracy and murder.



Antonio Iovine is a leader of the Camorra’s Casalesi clan. He was arrested in November 2010 and is serving a life sentence for conspiracy and murder.



Michele Zagaria is a leader of the Casalesi clan and was captured by Italian authorities in December 2011 after 15 years as a fugitive.  He is serving a life sentence for conspiracy, murder, extortion, and robbery.

  

**Identifying Information:**

  

CATERINO, Mario



DOB: 14 June 1957



POB: Casal di Principe, Italy

  

DELL’AQUILA, Giuseppe



AKA: PEPPE ‘O CIUCCIO



DOB: 20 March 1962



POB: Giugliano Campania, Italy

  

DI MAURO, Paolo



DOB: 19 October 1952



POB: Naples, Italy

  

IOVINE, Antonio



AKA: O’NINNO



DOB: 20 September 1964



POB: San Cipriano d’Aversa, Italy

  

ZAGARIA, Michele



AKA: CAPASTORTA



AKA: CAPOSTORTA



AKA: ISS



AKA: MANERA



AKA: ZIO



DOB: 21 May 1958



POB: San Cipriano d’Aversa, Italy

  

###
