---
title: Treasury Targets Money Exchange Houses for Supporting the Taliban
date: 2012-06-29
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1627
---
*(Archived Content)*

*Action Targets Terrorist Financing Linked to Hawalas*

**WASHINGTON** –The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated two exchange houses, the Haji Khairullah Haji Sattar Money Exchange (HKHS) and the Roshan Money Exchange (RMX), which principally operate in Afghanistan and Pakistan, pursuant to the U.S. government’s terrorism sanctions authority, Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, for storing or moving money for the Taliban. Treasury is also designating the co-owners of HKHS, Haji Abdul Sattar Barakzai and Haji Khairullah Barakzai, pursuant to E.O. 13224 for donating money and providing financial services to the Taliban.  Both HKHS and RMX operate as hawalas and have been used by the Taliban to facilitate money transfers in support of the Taliban’s narcotics trade and terrorist operations.  Today the United Nations also added Haji Abdul Sattar Barakzai, Haji Khairullah Barakzai, HKHS and RMX to its 1988 List of individuals, groups, undertakings and entities associated with the Taliban in constituting a threat to the peace, stability and security of Afghanistan.

“Today’s action, which coincides with action by the UN, is aimed at disabling two key financial hubs supporting the Taliban.  Whether financial support to the Taliban moves through banks or less formal mechanisms, like the hawalas we are designating in this action, we will continue to work alongside our partners to expose and disrupt this illicit financial activity,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.

As a result of today’s action, all property in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons in which HKHS, RMX, Haji Abdul Sattar Barakzai (Sattar), or Haji Khairullah Barakzai (Khairullah) have an interest is blocked, and U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.

**Haji Abdul Sattar Barakzai**Haji Abdul Sattar Barakzai is being designated today for owning, or controlling HKHS, and for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial, or other services to, or in support of, the Taliban.  Sattar is a co-owner and operator of HKHS.  Sattar and Khairullah have co-owned and jointly operated hawalas known as HKHS throughout Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Dubai and managed an HKHS branch in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region.  As of late 2009, Sattar and Khairullah had an equal partnership in HKHS.  Sattar founded HKHS and customers chose to use HKHS in part because of Sattar’s and Khairullah’s well-known names.

Sattar has donated thousands of dollars to the Taliban to support Taliban activities in Afghanistan and has distributed funds to the Taliban using his hawala.  As of 2010, Sattar provided financial assistance to the Taliban.  As of late 2009, Sattar provided tens of thousands of dollars to aid the Taliban’s fight against Coalition Forces in Marjah, Nad’Ali District, Helmand Province, Afghanistan, and helped to transport a Taliban member to Marjah.  As of 2008, Sattar and Khairullah collected money from businessmen and distributed the funds to the Taliban using their hawala.

**Haji Khairullah Barakzai**Haji Khairullah Barakzai is being designated today for owning or controlling HKHS, and for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial, or other services to, or in support of, the Taliban.  Khairullah is a co-owner and operator of HKHS.  As of late 2009, Khairullah and Sattar had an equal partnership in HKHS.  They jointly operated hawalas known as HKHS throughout Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Dubai and managed an HKHS branch in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region.  As of early 2010, Khairullah was the head of the HKHS branch in Kabul.

As of 2010, Khairullah was a hawaladar, or hawala operator, for Taliban senior leadership and provided financial assistance to the Taliban.  Khairullah, along with his business partner Sattar, provided thousands of dollars to the Taliban to support Taliban activities in Afghanistan.  As of 2008, Khairullah and Sattar collected money from businessmen and distributed the funds to the Taliban using their hawala.

**Haji Khairullah Haji Sattar Money Exchange (HKHS)**

Haji Khairullah Haji Sattar Money Exchange (HKHS) is being designated today for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial or other services to, or in support of, the Taliban.  HKHS is co-owned by Haji Abdul Sattar Barakzai and Haji Khairullah Barakzai.  Sattar and Khairullah have jointly operated money exchanges throughout Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran, and the United Arab Emirates (UAE).  Taliban leaders have used HKHS to disseminate money to Taliban shadow governors and commanders and to receive hawala transfers for the Taliban.

As of 2011, HKHS was a preferred method for Taliban leadership to transfer money to Taliban commanders in Afghanistan.  In late 2011, the HKHS branch in Lashkar Gah, Helmand Province, Afghanistan was used to send money to the Taliban shadow governor for Helmand Province.  In mid-2011, a Taliban commander used an HKHS branch in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region to fund fighters and operations in Afghanistan. After the Taliban deposited a significant amount of cash monthly with this HKHS branch, Taliban commanders could access the funds from any HKHS branch.  Taliban personnel used HKHS in 2010 to transfer money to hawalas in Afghanistan, where operational commanders could access the funds.  As of late 2009, the manager of the HKHS branch in Lashkar Gah oversaw the movement of Taliban funds through HKHS.

**Roshan Money Exchange**Roshan Money Exchange (RMX) is being designated today for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial, or other services to, or in support of, the Taliban.  RMX stores and transfers funds in support of Taliban military operations and the Taliban’s role in the Afghan narcotics trade.  As of 2011, RMX was one of the primary hawalas used by Taliban officials in Helmand Province.

In 2011, a senior Taliban member withdrew hundreds of thousands of dollars from an RMX branch in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region to distribute to Taliban shadow provincial governors.  To fund the Taliban’s spring offensive in 2011, the Taliban shadow governor of Helmand Province sent hundreds of thousands of dollars to RMX.  Also in 2011, a Taliban member received tens of thousands of dollars from RMX to support military operations.  An RMX branch in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region also held tens of thousands of dollars to be collected by a Taliban commander.  In 2010, on behalf of the Taliban shadow governor of Helmand Province, a Taliban member used RMX to send thousands of dollars to the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region.

The RMX branch in Lashkar Gah, Helmand Province, has been used by the Taliban to transfer funds for operations to Helmand Province.  In 2011, a Taliban sub-commander transferred tens of thousands of dollars to a Taliban commander through the RMX branch in Lashkar Gah.  The Taliban also sent funds to the RMX branch in Lashkar Gah for distribution to Taliban commanders in 2010.  Also in 2010, a Taliban member used RMX to send tens of thousands of dollars to Helmand Province and Herat Province, Afghanistan, on behalf of the Taliban shadow governor of Helmand Province.

In 2009, a senior Taliban representative collected hundreds of thousands of dollars from an RMX branch in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region to finance Taliban military operations in Afghanistan.  In 2008, a Taliban leader used RMX to transfer tens of thousands of dollars to Afghanistan.

The Taliban also uses RMX to facilitate its role in the Afghan narcotics trade.  As of 2011, Taliban officials, including the shadow governor of Helmand Province, transferred hundreds of thousands of dollars from an RMX branch in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region to hawalas in Afghanistan for the purchase of narcotics on behalf of Taliban officials.  Also in 2011, a Taliban official directed Taliban commanders in Helmand Province to transfer opium proceeds through RMX.  One Taliban district chief transferred thousands of dollars from Marjah, Helmand Province, Afghanistan to an RMX branch in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region.

**Identifying Information Haji Abdul Sattar Barakzai**Name:  Haji Abdul Sattar Barakzai

AKA:  Haji Abdul Satar Haji Abdul Manan

AKA:  Haji Abdul Satar

AKA:  Abdulasattar

AKA:  Haji Satar Barakzai

DOB:  1964

POB:  Mirmandaw Village, Nahr-e Saraj District, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

Alt. POB:  Mirmadaw Village, Gereshk District, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

Alt. POB:  Qilla Abdullah, Pakistan

Passport:  AM5421691 (Pakistan)

Passport Expiry Date:  11 August 2013

Pakistan National Identification Number:  5420250161699

Afghan National Identification Number:  585629

Address:  Kachray Road, Pashtunabad, Quetta, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

Alt. Address:  Nasrullah Khan Chowk, Pashtunabad Area, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

Alt. Address:  Chaman, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

Alt. Address:  Abdul Satar Food Shop, Eno Mina 0093, Kandahar, Afghanistan

 

**Haji Khairullah Barakzai**Name:  Haji Khairullah Barakzai

AKA:  Haji Khairullah

AKA:  Haji Khair Ullah

AKA:  Haji Kheirullah

AKA:  Haji Kherullah

AKA:  Haji Karimullah

AKA:  Hajji Khair Mohammad

DOB:  1965

POB:  Zumbaleh Village, Nahr-e Saraj District, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

Alt. POB:  Mirmadaw Village, Gereshk District, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

Alt. POB:  Qal'ah Abdulla, Pakistan

Passport:  BP4199631 (Pakistan)

Passport Expiry Date:  25 June 2014

Pakistan National Identification Number: 5440005229635

Address:  Abdul Manan Chowk, Pashtunabad, Quetta, Pakistan

 

**Haji Khairullah Hail Sattar Money Exchange**Entity Name:  Haji Khairullah Haji Sattar Money Exchange

AKA:  Haji Khairullah-Haji Sattar Sarafi

AKA:  Haji Khairullah and Abdul Sattar and Company

AKA:  Haji Khairullah Money Exchange

AKA:  Haji Khair Ullah Money Service

AKA:  Haji Salam Hawala

AKA:  Haji Hakim Hawala

AKA:  Haji Alim Hawala

Pakistan National Tax Number:  1774308

Pakistan National Tax Number:  0980338

Pakistan National Tax Number:  3187777

Afghan Money Service Provider License Number:  044

 

Branch Office 1

Location:  Chohar Mir Road, Qandahari Bazaar, Quetta, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

Alt. Location:  Room #1, Abdul Sattar Plaza, Hafiz Saleem Street, Munsafi Road, Quetta, Balochistan, Pakistan

Alt. Location:  Shop #3, Dr. Bano Road, Quetta, Pakistan

Alt. Location:  Office #3, Near Fatima Jinnah Road, Dr. Bano Road, Quetta, Pakistan

Alt. Location:  Kachara Road, Naserullah Khan Chawk, Quetta, Pakistan

Alt. Location:  Wazir Mohammad Road, Quetta, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

 

Branch Office 2

Location:  Peshawar, Khyber Paktunkhwa Province, Pakistan

 

Branch Office 3

Location:  Moishah Chowk Road, Lahore, Punjab Province, Pakistan

 

Branch Office 4

Location:  Karachi, Sindh Province, Pakistan

 

Branch Office 5

Location:  2 Larran Road, Chaman, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

Alt. Location:  Chaman Central Bazaar, Chaman, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

 

Branch Office 6

Location:  Shah Zada Market, Shop Number 237, Kabul, Afghanistan

Alt. Location:  Sarai Shahzada, 3rd Floor, Shop Number 257, Kabul, Afghanistan

Alt. Location:  Sharai Shahzada Market, Kabul, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 7

Location:         Kandahar City Sarafi Market, 2nd Floor, Shop 21 and 22, Kandahar City, Kandahar Province, Afghanistan

Alt. Location:  New Sarafi Market, 2nd Floor, Kandahar City, Kandahar Province, Afghanistan

Alt. Location:  Safi Market, Kandahar City, Kandahar Province, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 8

Location:  Gereshk City, Nahr-e Saraj District, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 9

Location: Lashkar Gah Bazaar, Lashkar Gah, Lashkar Gah District, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

Alt. Location:  Haji Ghulam Nabi Market, 2nd Floor, Lashkar Gah District, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 10

Location:  Khorasan Market, 3rd Floor, Suite Number 196-197, Herat, Afghanistan

Alt. Location:  Shahre Naw, District 5, Khorasan Market, Herat, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 11

Location:  Sarafi Market, Zaranj District, Nimroz Province, Afghanistan

Alt. Location:  Ansari Market, 2nd Floor, Nimroz, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 12

Location:  Sarafi Market, Wesh, Afghanistan

Alt. Location:  Wesh, Spin Boldak District, Kandahar Province, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 13

Location:  Sarafi Market, Farah, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 14

Location:  Dubai, United Arab Emirates

 

Branch Office 15

Location:  Zahedan, Iran

 

Branch Office 16

Location:  Zabul, Iran.

 

Roshan Money Exchange

Entity Name:  Roshan Money Exchange

AKA:  Roshan Sarafi

AKA:  Roshan Trading Company

AKA:  Rushaan Trading Company

AKA:  Roshan Shirkat

AKA:  Maulawi Ahmed Shah Hawala

AKA:  Mullah Ahmed Shah Hawala

AKA:  Haji Ahmad Shah Hawala

AKA:  Ahmad Shah Hawala

 

Branch Office 1

Location:  Fahr Khan (variant Furqan) Center, Shop #1584, Chalhor Mal Road, Quetta, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

Alt. Location:  St. Flore, Flat #4, Furgan Center, Jamaludden (variant Jamaludin) Afghani Road, Quetta, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

Alt. Location:  Muslim Plaza Building, Doctor Banu Road, 2nd Floor, Office #4, Quetta, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

Alt. Location:  Cholmon Road, Quetta, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

Alt. Location:  Munsafi Road, Quetta, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

Alt. Location:  Abdul Samad Khan Street, Next to Fathma Jena Road, Kadari Place, First Floor, Shop #1, Quetta, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

 

Branch Office 2

Location: Safar Bazaar, Garm Ser District, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

Alt. Location:  Main Bazaar, Safar, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 3

Location:  Money Exchange Market, Lashkar Gah, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

Alt. Location:  Haji Ghulam Nabi Market, Lashkar Gah, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

Alt. Location:  Lashkar Gah Bazaar, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 4

Location:  Hazar Joft, Garmser District, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 5

Location:  Ismat Bazaar, Marjah District, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 6

Location:  Zaranj, Nimruz Province, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 7

Location:  Suite 8, 4th Floor, Sarafi Market, District 1, Kandahar City, Kandahar Province, Afghanistan

Alt. Location:  Floor 5, Shop 25, Kandahar City Sarafi Market, Kandahar District, Kandahar Province, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 8

Location:  Lakri, Helmand Province, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 9

Location:  Aziz Market, in front of Azizi Bank, Waish Border, Spin Boldak District, Kandahar Province, Afghanistan

 

Branch Office 10

Location:  Gardi Jungle, Balochistan Province, Pakistan

 

Branch Office 11

Location:  Chaghi, Balochistan Province, Pakistan.

   

###​
