---
title: Treasury Announces Public Offering for All of Its Remaining AIG Common Stock Holdings
date: 2012-12-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1794
---
*(Archived Content)*



WASHINGTON – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced that it has launched an underwritten public offering for all of its remaining 234,169,156 shares of American International Group, Inc. (AIG) common stock.

  

If the offering is completed, Treasury would continue to hold warrants to purchase AIG’s common stock that were also issued as part of AIG’s participation in Treasury programs.

  

BofA Merrill Lynch, Citigroup, Deutsche Bank Securities Inc., Goldman, Sachs & Co. and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC have been retained as joint bookrunners for the offering.

  

The offering will be made under AIG's shelf registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and only by means of a prospectus supplement and accompanying prospectus. When available, a copy of the prospectus supplement and accompanying prospectus relating to the offering may be obtained from the Securities and Exchange Commission's Web site atwww.sec.gov  or by contacting any of (i) BofA Merrill Lynch, 222 Broadway, New York, NY 10038, Attn: Prospectus Department, or by emailing[dg.prospectus_requests@baml.com](http://www.globenewswire.com/newsroom/ctr?d=244711&l=4&a=dg.prospectus_requests%40baml.com&u=mailto:dg.prospectus_requests%40baml.com),(ii) Citigroup, c/o Broadridge Financial Solutions, 1155 Long Island Avenue, Edgewood, NY 11717 (Tel: 800-831-9146), (iii) Deutsche Bank Securities Inc., Attn: Prospectus Group, 60 Wall Street, New York, NY 10005-2836, by calling 1-800-503-4611, or by[emailingprospectus.cpdg@db.com](mailto:emailingprospectus.cpdg@db.com), (iv) Goldman, Sachs & Co. Attn: Prospectus Department, 200 West Street, New York, NY 10282, by calling toll-free 866-471-2526, by faxing 212-902-9316 or by emailing[prospectus-ny@ny.gmail.gs.com](mailto:prospectus-ny@ny.gmail.gs.com), or (v) J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, c/o Broadridge Financial Solutions, 1155 Long Island Avenue, Edgewood, NY 11717, by calling 866-803-9204.

  

###

 ​
