---
title: Nani Coloretti Sworn in as Assistant Secretary for Management
date: 2012-11-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1774
---
*(Archived Content)*



**WASHINGTON – **Nani Coloretti today was sworn in as the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Assistant Secretary for Management following her appointment by the President.  In this role, Coloretti will advisethe Secretary onthe development and execution of Treasury’s budget and performance plans and the internal management of the Department and its bureaus.



Coloretti has served as the Treasury Department’s Deputy Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget since 2009 and as Acting Assistant Secretary for Management since April 2012.  After President Obama signed the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act into law, she helped stand up the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau as its first Acting Chief Operating Officer.  Under the leadership of the Deputy Secretary, Coloretti helped create and implement quarterly bureau performance and budget reviews.  Such reviews have become best practices and are used throughout the federal government.



“Nani has been a trusted advisor at Treasury for more than three years. During that time she has worked tirelessly to help Treasury and its bureaus operate as efficiently as possible,” said Treasury Secretary Geithner. “Her management expertise and deep knowledge of the department will be a tremendous asset to this Administration in this new, expanded role.”



Prior to joining Treasury, Coloretti served in San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom’s office, where she worked for four years.  While there, she engaged stakeholders to create and implement San Francisco’s $6.5 billion annual budget, and developed programs and policies to carry out the Mayor’s priorities in several areas, such as health care and information technology.  Coloretti’s prior work also includes: directing investment at a San Francisco department for children and youth, economics consulting at the Law and Economic Consulting Group, a firm started by several University of California at Berkeley professors; budget, health, and welfare analysis at the federal Office of Management and Budget during the Clinton Administration, and budget analysis on the state budget in Hawaii.



She is married to David Goldstein and has one son, Kaleo Goldstein-Coloretti.



# # #
