---
title: Regions Financial Corporation Repays $3.5 Billion In Tarp Funds, Positive Return from Tarp’s Bank Programs Reaches $18 Billion
date: 2012-04-04T12:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1523
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** –Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced that Regions Financial Corporation has repurchased its outstanding $3.5 billion in Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) Capital Purchase Program (CPP) preferred stock.

With today’s repayment, the overall positive return from TARP’s bank programs has now reached $18 billion. Treasury invested a total of $245 billion through TARP’s bank programs and has recovered $263 billion to date through repayments, dividends, interest, and other income. Going forward, each additional dollar recovered through TARP’s bank programs represents an additional dollar of profit from those programs for taxpayers.

“This repayment is another milestone in our efforts to wind down TARP and provides an additional profit for taxpayers on the program’s investment in banks,” said Assistant Secretary for Financial Stability Tim Massad. “Replacing temporary government support with private capital is an important component of continuing to restore financial stability.”

In addition to today’s $3.5 billion repayment, Regions Financial has also paid taxpayers $593 million in dividends over the life of its TARP investment. Treasury continues to holds warrants to purchase common stock in Regions Financial – the disposition of which will provide an additional positive return to taxpayers.

To date, taxpayers have already recovered 81 percent ($337 billion) of the total funds disbursed across all TARP programs ($415 billion) through repayments, dividends, interest, and other income. For more details on Treasury’s lifetime cost estimates for TARP programs, please visit Treasury’s Monthly 105(a) Report to Congress on TARP at this[link](http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/financial-stability/briefing-room/reports/105/Pages/default.aspx).

###
