---
title:  Treasury Targets Los Zetas Linked Oil Services Company
date: 2012-08-29
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1693
---
*(Archived Content)*
**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today announced the designation of ADT Petroservicios, S.A. De C.V., an oil services company owned by narcotics trafficker Francisco Antonio Colorado Cessa who is tied to Los Zetas. Today’s action, taken pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act), prohibits U.S. persons from engaging in any transactions with ADT Petroservicios, S.A. De C.V. and freezes any assets the company may have under U.S. jurisdiction.
 
On June 12, 2012, OFAC designated Mexican national Francisco Antonio Colorado Cessa as a specially designated narcotics trafficker for materially assisting the international narcotics trafficking of Los Zetas and its leaders Miguel Angel Trevino Morales and Omar Trevino Morales. Colorado Cessa owns and controls ADT Petroservicios, S.A. De C.V., which is located in Veracruz, Mexico. Also on that date, the U.S. Attorneys’ Office for the Western District of Texas charged Colorado Cessa, Miguel Angel Trevino Morales, and Omar Trevino Morales with money laundering on behalf of Los Zetas and its senior leadership. Colorado Cessa is currently in U.S. custody awaiting trial.
 
“By exposing this business of Francisco Antonio Colorado Cessa, which is tied to the violent Los Zetas group, we are depriving their organization of an avenue to launder their illicit proceeds,” said OFAC Director Adam J. Szubin. “We will continue to target individuals and businesses linked to Los Zetas wherever they attempt to conceal their illegal activities.”
 
Los Zetas is a Mexican drug trafficking organization that the President identified as a significant foreign narcotics trafficker pursuant to the Kingpin Act in April 2009. OFAC subsequently designated Miguel Angel Trevino Morales and Omar Trevino Morales as specially designated narcotics traffickers pursuant to the Kingpin Act in July 2009 and March 2010, respectively.
 
Today’s action is part of ongoing efforts pursuant to the Kingpin Act to apply financial measures against significant foreign narcotics traffickers and their organizations worldwide. The Treasury Department has designated more than 1,100 individuals and entities pursuant to the Kingpin Act since June 2000.
 
Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties. Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million. Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million. Other individuals face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.
 
To view a chart of the Cessa Morales organization click* here.*
 
###

- [082912 Zetas KP Oil Services Company Chart.pdf](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/082912%2BZetas%2BKP%2BOil%2BServices%2BCompany%2BChart.pdf)
