---
title: Treasury Designates Syrian Government Officials
date: 2012-03-30
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1517
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** –The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the designations of three senior officials of the Government of Syria – Syria’s Minister of Defense Dawood Rajiha, Syria’s Deputy Chief of Staff of the Army Munir Adanov and Syria’s Head of Presidential Security Zuhayr Shalish – pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13573.

The Syrian regime’s continued use of violence against its people has imposed a devastating toll on Syria. Through today’s action, the United States reinforces its commitment to stand with the Syrian people, and it also sends a strong message to the Syrian armed forces and all Syrian officials that the international community is bearing witness to the regime’s brutality.  The United States will continue to work with our partners around the world to ensure that the Syrian regime and its senior officials are held accountable for the continued repression in Syria.

“The U.S. and the international community will hold to account those who stand with the Asad regime as it trains the instruments of war against Syrian civilians. The time has long since passed for Syrian officials at all levels to turn their backs on this bloody regime,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.

Signed by President Obama on May 18, 2011, E.O. 13573 targets those determined to be senior officials of the Government of Syria. U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with any of the designees and any assets they may have subject to U.S. jurisdiction are frozen.

**Designated Individuals: Dawood Rajiha**Dawood Rajiha was appointed Minister of Defense on August 10, 2011 and was reportedly chosen for his loyalty to the Asad regime.**Munir Adanov**Munir Adanov has served as Syria’s Deputy Chief of Staff of the Army since at least July 2010 and has accompanied President Asad on several high-level official visits abroad. Adanov was sanctioned by the European Union in August 2011, for his direct involvement in “repression and violence against the civilian population in Syria.”**Zuhayr Shalish**As Syria’s Head of Presidential Security, Zuhayr Shalish has served as Bashar Asad’s personal bodyguard. In July 2011, Shalish, a relative of Bashar Asad, was sanctioned by the European Union for his involvement in “violence against demonstrators.”**Identifying Information: Individual:     RAJIHA, DAWOOD**AKA:             RAJIHA, DAWOOD ABDUKLLAH

AKA:             RAJHA, DAOOD

AKA:             RAJIHAH, DAWUD

AKA:             RAJHA, DAVOUD

AKA:             RAJHA, DAWOOD

AKA:             RAJHA, DAWOUD

DOB:             1947

POB:              Damascus, Syria

Rank:              General

Title:               Minister of Defense

 

**Individual:     ADANOV, MUNIR**AKA:             ADANOF, MUNIR

AKA:             ADNUF, MUNIR

DOB:             1951

Rank:              Lieutenant General

Title:               Deputy Chief of General Staff of the Syrian Arab Army

 

**Individual:     SHALISH, ZUHAYR**AKA:             AL-HEMMEH, THU

AKA:             AL-SHALISH DHU AL-HIMMEH

AKA:             SHALEESH, DHU HIMMA

AKA:             SHALEESH, THU AL HIMA

AKA:             SHALISH, DHU AL HIMMA

AKA:             SHALISH, DHUIL HIMMA

AKA:             SHALISH, ZUHILMA

DOB:             circa 1956

POB:              Al-Ladhiqiyah, Syria

Rank:              Major General

Alt. Rank:      Brigadier General

 

###
