---
title: Treasury Announces Public Offering of AIG Common Stock
date: 2012-05-04
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1570
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** –Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced that it has launched an underwritten public offering of its American International Group, Inc. (AIG) common stock.  The size and price to the public of the offering will be announced after pricing of the offering.  AIG has indicated that it intends to purchase up to $2 billion of the common stock sold by Treasury in this offering at the initial public offering price.

 

BofA Merrill Lynch, Citigroup Global Markets Inc., Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC,Deutsche Bank Securities Inc.,Goldman, Sachs & Co.,J.P. Morgan Securities LLCand Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC have been retained as joint bookrunners for the offering.

 

The offering will be made under AIG’s shelf registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and only by means of a prospectus supplement and accompanying prospectus. When available, a copy of the prospectus supplement and accompanying prospectus relating to the offering may be obtained from the Securities and Exchange Commission’s Web site at[www.sec.gov](http://www.sec.gov/)or by contacting any of (i) BofA Merrill Lynch, 4 World Financial Center, New York, NY 10080, Attn: Prospectus Department or email[dg.prospectus_requests@baml.com](mailto:dg.prospectus_requests@baml.com), (ii) Citigroup Global Markets Inc., Attn: Prospectus Department,  Brooklyn Army Terminal, 140 58th Street, 8th Floor, Brooklyn, New York 11220, by calling 877-858-5407 or emailing[batprospectusdept@citi.com](mailto:batprospectusdept@citi.com), (iii) Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC, Attn: Prospectus Department, One Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10010, by emailing[newyork.prospectus@credit-suisse.com](mailto:newyork.prospectus@credit-suisse.com)or calling 800-221-1037., (iv) Deutsche Bank Securities Inc., Attention: Prospectus Group, 60 Wall Street, New York, NY 10005-2836, by calling 1-800-503-4611, or by emailing[prospectus.cpdg@db.com](mailto:prospectus.cpdg@db.com), (v) Goldman, Sachs & Co. Attn: Prospectus Department, 200 West Street, New York, New York 10282, by calling toll-free 866-471-2526, by faxing 212-902-9316 or by emailing[prospectus-ny@ny.gmail.gs.com](mailto:prospectus-ny@ny.gmail.gs.com), (vi) J.P. Morgan Securities LLC,  c/o Broadridge Financial Solutions, 1155 Long Island Avenue, Edgewood, NY 11717, by calling 866 803-9204, or (vii) Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, c/o Prospectus Department, 180 Varick Street 2/F, New York, NY 10014 or by emailing at[prospectus@morganstanley.com](mailto:prospectus@morganstanley.com).

 

###
