---
title:  Treasury Targets Top Guatemalan Drug Trafficker
date: 2012-01-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1395
---
*(Archived Content)*
**WASHINGTON-** The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today announced the designation of Guatemalan national Marllory Dadiana Chacon Rossell and seven other individuals and entities connected to Chacon Rossell’s drug trafficking and money laundering organization as Specially Designated Narcotics Traffickers (SDNTs). Today’s action, taken pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act), prohibits U.S. persons from conducting financial or commercial transactions with these entities and individuals and freezes any assets the designees may have under U.S. jurisdiction.
 
Marllory Dadiana Chacon Rossell leads a drug trafficking and money laundering organization based out of Guatemala with operations in Honduras and Panama that supplies the Mexican drug cartels.  Chacon Rossell is believed to be one of the most prolific narcotics traffickers in Central America.  She is responsible for transshipping thousands of kilograms of cocaine per month through Guatemala, into Mexico, and on to the United States.  Chacon Rossell is also believed to launder tens of millions of U.S. dollars in narcotics proceeds each month, making her the most active money launderer in Guatemala.
 
“Marllory Chacon’s drug trafficking activities and her ties to the Mexican drug cartels make her a critical figure in the narcotics trade,” said OFAC Director Adam J. Szubin.  “By designating Chacon, OFAC is disrupting those activities and closing off from the U.S. financial system the network of companies aiding Chacon’s illicit activities.”
 
OFAC is also designating Jorge Andres Fernandez Carbajal, Chacon’s husband, a Honduran citizen responsible for providing logistical support for his wife’s organization.  Hayron Eduardo Borrayo Lasmibat and Mirza Silvana Hernandez De Borrayo, both Guatemalan nationals, are also being designated today for providing support to Marllory Chacon’s drug trafficking activities.   OFAC is also designating two Guatemalan companies, Bingoton Millonario and Revoluciones Por Minuto Aceleracion S.A., which are owned, controlled, or directed by Mirza Silvana Hernandez de Borrayo and Hayron Eduardo Borrayo Lasmibat, and two Panamanian companies, Andrea Yari S.A. and Fer’Seg S.A, which are owned, controlled, or directed by Jorge Andres Fernandez Carbajal.
 
OFAC coordinated on this investigation with the Drug Enforcement Administration.  Today’s action is part of ongoing efforts pursuant to the Kingpin Act to apply financial measures against significant foreign narcotics traffickers and their organizations worldwide. The Treasury Department has designated more than 1,000 individuals and entities pursuant to the Kingpin Act since June 2000.  
 
Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties. Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million. Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million. Other individuals face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.
 
*To view a chart of the Chacon Rossell affiliates, click here.*
 
###

​
