---
title: Treasury Targets the Second Wife of Chapo Guzman
date: 2012-09-06
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1699
---
*(Archived Content)*



**WASHINGTON –**The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today announced the designation of Griselda Lopez Perez, a wife of fugitive drug lord Joaquin “Chapo” Guzman Loera, who plays a key role in his drug trafficking organization.  Today’s action, pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act), prohibits U.S. persons from conducting financial or commercial transactions with this individual, and also freezes any assets she may have under U.S. jurisdiction.



“Today marks the third time in the past five months that OFAC has targeted family members who act on behalf of Chapo Guzman,” said OFAC Director Adam J. Szubin.  “This action builds on Treasury’s aggressive efforts, alongside its law enforcement partners, to target individuals who facilitate Chapo Guzman’s drug trafficking operations.”



“DEA and its partners are attacking Chapo Guzman's drug trafficking operations at every level, using the law enforcement tools available to bring these criminals to justice,” said DEA Chief of Financial Operations John Arvanitis. “This is another strike against the brutal Sinaloa Cartel and Chapo's wife, who has served as a major criminal facilitator on his behalf.”



OFAC is designating Griselda Lopez Perez for her role in the operations of Guzman Loera’s drug trafficking organization, including her efforts to assist Guzman Loera in evading justice.  Additionally, Griselda Lopez Perez provides material support to the drug trafficking activities of her husband.  Guzman Loera was identified by the President as a significant foreign narcotics trafficker pursuant to the Kingpin Act in 2001.



Today’s action would not have been possible without the key support of the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA).  The U.S. Customs and Border Protection also assisted with today’s action.



Internationally, OFAC has designated more than 1,100 businesses and individuals linked to 97 drug kingpins since June 2000.  Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties.  Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million. Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million.  Other individuals could face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.



*To view a chart of the Chapo Guzman organization, click here.*



###​
