---
title: Testimony of Christopher J. Meade Before the Senate Finance Committee for Nomination to be the General Counsel of the U.S. Department of the Treasury
date: 2012-12-20
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1812
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** - Thank you, Chairman Baucus, Ranking Member Hatch, and Members of this Committee for the opportunity to appear before you today in connection with my nomination to be the General Counsel of the Treasury Department.

I am deeply honored that President Obama nominated me for this position, and I am grateful to Secretary Geithner for recommending me to the President.

I would like to begin by introducing my family:  my wife, Stella; my daughter, Nora; and my new son, Elliot.  As you know, public service places great demands on one’s family – and I am very thankful to my family for their constant love and support.  I would like to introduce my mother, Mary Ann Meade, and acknowledge my father, Bill Meade, who passed away a few years ago.  I would also like to acknowledge my friends and colleagues who are here with me today.

My parents instilled in me a deep commitment to public service – a value that I hope to pass on to my children.  This commitment has been reinforced throughout my career.  At the beginning of my career, I had the honor and privilege to serve as a law clerk to Justice John Paul Stevens and to Judge Harry T. Edwards of the D.C. Circuit.  They are not only great jurists; they are great public servants.  I spent the core of my legal career as a partner at a law firm that is deeply committed to public service.  I learned from many great lawyers there, including many who have served our country with distinction.

I have spent nearly three years serving as the Principal Deputy General Counsel at Treasury.  The scope of legal issues within Treasury is vast, ranging from domestic and international economic affairs, terrorist financing and enforcement, tax, ethics, and administrative law.  My service has given me great respect for the Treasury Department and, in particular, for the talent and expertise of the career lawyers at Treasury.

If confirmed, I look forward to working closely with Congress, and especially Members of this Committee.  I have enormous respect for this institution, and it is an honor to appear before you today.  I am committed to maintaining a close working relationship between Treasury and Congress.

Mr. Chairman, I am grateful to you for bringing me before this Committee, and I would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other Members of this Committee may have.

Thank you.

 

###
