---
title: Treasury Imposes Sanctions on Leading Members of Indonesia-Based Terrorist Group
date: 2012-02-23T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1429
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today designated three individuals for acting for or on behalf of Jemmah Anshorut Tauhid (JAT) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224. These individuals are acting Emir Mochammad Achwan; JAT spokesperson Son Hadi bin Muhadjir; and JAT leader Abdul Rosyid Ridho Ba’asyir, who is involved in recruiting and fundraising activities. This action coincides with the action taken today by the U.S. Department of State to designate JAT as a Foreign Terrorist Organization under Section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act and as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist under section 1(b) of E.O. 13224. JAT is an Indonesia-based terrorist group responsible for multiple coordinated attacks that have resulted in the deaths of innocent civilians, police and military personnel in Indonesia.The founder and leader of JAT is Abu Bakar Ba’asyir, who is also the co-founder of Jemaah Islamiya (JI), the Southeast Asia-based designated terrorist network with links to al-Qa’ida. Since 2002, more than 20 JI terrorists, including Abu Bakar Ba’asyir, have been designated by the United States pursuant to E.O. 13224 and added to the UN 1267 Committee’s list. E.O. 13224 freezes any assets the designated individuals have under U.S. jurisdiction, and U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in any transactions with those individuals. “By designating the leaders of Jemmah Anshorut Tauhid, OFAC is taking another step to ensure that terrorists are cut off from the international financial system and find it ever more difficult to carry out their acts of violence, no matter where they are based,” said Adam Szubin, Director of Treasury’s OFAC.As a result of today’s action, all property in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons in which Mochammad Achwan, Son Hadi bin Muhadjir and Abdul Rosyid Ridho Ba'asyir have an interest is blocked, and U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.** Mochammad Achwan** Mochammad Achwan (Achwan) is JAT’s acting Emir. In August 2010, JAT Emir and Jemaah Islamiya (JI) co-founder Abu Bakar Ba’asyir appointed Achwan as acting Emir and supreme leader of JAT. Achwan had served on JAT’s executive council since 2008.Achwan has performed a number of leadership duties in JAT, overseeing the allocation of JAT funds and promoting JAT terrorist training, recruitment and operations. In June 2011, Achwan requested that certain JAT funds be given to senior JI network leader and al-Qa’ida associate Abdul Rahim Ba’asyir (Abdul Rahim), who was designated in August 2011 pursuant to E.O. 13224. Achwan ordered the leader of a JAT branch in June 2011 to confirm details of a donation to another JAT official. In May 2011, Achwan hosted a meeting in Jakarta, Indonesia, to discuss JAT’s financial status and methods for finding new revenue sources and donations.In late 2010, Achwan inducted new JAT recruits and instructed JAT members to obey the Emir and participate in physical training to prepare for possible warfare. Also in late 2010, Achwan directed paramilitary training in Poso, Indonesia, with a JI and JAT member who was arrested in Indonesia in December 2010.In late 2010, Achwan instructed JAT’s military unit, also known as “Laskar 99,” to unconditionally support violent activities throughout the world and informed them about weapons available to members with the requisite training. Laskar 99 is a special JAT military unit involved in weapons training.In an August 2010 Indonesian press interview, Achwan said he had no intention of giving up his obligation to wage violence, and he sanctioned the use of violence against the Indonesian police’s anti-terrorism squad, Detachment 88. Achwan also praised JI terrorists Dulmatin (deceased) and Imam Samudra (executed in 2008 for his role in the 2002 Bali bombings, which killed 202 people).Circa 2010, Achwan provided funding for an Aceh terrorist training camp that gathered militants from various regional groups under the leadership of JI operative Dulmatin. The militants, using the name “Al-Qa’ida in Aceh,” plotted to kill U.S. aid workers and Western tourists. Elements of JI and several other groups organized the Aceh camp’s military training and between January 2009 and February 2010, several leading JI figures were involved with the camp.As of 2007, Achwan was a leader of JI in Eastern Java, Indonesia. Then-JI leader Abu Bakar Ba’asyir tasked Achwan with establishing a logistical hub for JI to plan and prepare attacks.** Son Hadi bin Muhadjir** Son Hadi bin Muhadjir (Son Hadi) is JAT’s spokesperson and has provided support to the JI network’s operations. As of June 2011, Son Hadi was director of the JAT Media Center (JMC). As of March 2011, Son Hadi received operational guidance directly from JAT senior leadership including acting Emir Mochammad Achwan. In 2009, Son Hadi held a leadership position in a regional JAT office as secretary for JAT proselytizing efforts in East Java, Indonesia.Son Hadi has been a longtime JI supporter. In 2004, Son Hadi became the leader of JI’s administrative region in East Java, Indonesia. Between 1997 and 2004, Son Hadi worked alongside a JI official in a foundation that at that time was a center of JI activities in Surabaya, Indonesia. In 2005, Son Hadi was convicted and sentenced to four years in prison for harboring now-deceased senior JI operative Noordin Mat Top. Son Hadi also took possession of the explosives used in JI’s 2004 bombing of the Australian Embassy in Jakarta, Indonesia, which killed nine people and injured 182 others.** Abdul Rosyid Ridho Ba’asyir** Abdul Rosyid Ridho Ba’asyir (Abdul Rosyid) is a JAT leadership figure involved in recruiting JAT members and raising funds for JAT. Abdul Rosyid served on JAT’s executive council as of 2010.As of February 2011, Abdul Rosyid was taking an increasingly visible role in JAT’s Laskar 99 military unit, overseeing its routine management functions. As of April 2010, Abdul Rosyid had started to recruit snipers and explosives specialists to be trained to become martyrs, probably on behalf of JAT. As director of an Indonesian boarding school, Abdul Rosyid’s main function was to proselytize and recruit his students for membership in JAT and another JAT-associated group. Abdul Rosyid led separate discussion groups in 2008 with various JI officials, probably for the purpose of recruiting new members into JAT and the JAT-associated group.In early 2010, Abdul Rosyid traveled to a boarding school in Malaysia on orders from Abu Bakar Ba’asyir to conduct fundraising for JAT. Abu Bakar Ba’asyir wanted the Malaysian boarding school to expand and accelerate the pace of funding to JAT. Abdul Rosyid also traveled to Pakistan in January 2011 under the direction of Abu Bakar Ba’asyir to fundraise.** Identifying Information:** Name: MOCHAMMAD ACHWANAKA: Muhammad AchwanAKA: Muhammad AkhwanAKA: Mochtar AchwanAKA: Mochtar AkhwanAKA: Mochtar AkwanAKA: Mochdar AchwanDOB: 4 May 1948Alt. DOB: 4 May 1946POB: Tulungagung, IndonesiaNationality: IndonesianNational Identity Card No.: 3573010405480001, IndonesianAddress: Jalan Ir. H. Juanda 8/10, RT/RW 002/001,Jodipan, Blimbing, Malang, IndonesiaName: SON HADI BIN MUHADJIRAKA: Son Hadi bin MuhadjrAKA: Son bn Hadi MuhadjirAKA: Son Hadi bin MujahirDOB: 12 May 1971POB: Pasuran, East Java, IndonesiaNationality: IndonesianNational Identity Card No.: 3514131205710004, IndonesianAddress: Jalan Raya Gongdanglegi, RT/RW 1/13Cangkring Malang, Beji, Pasuran 67154 IndonesiaPassport Number: R057803, IndonesianName: ABDUL ROSYID RIDHO BA’ASYIRAKA: Abdul Rosyid Ridho BashirAKA: Rosyid Ridho Ba’asyirAKA: Rosyid Ridho BashirAKA: Rasyid Ridho Ba’asyirAKA: Rasyid Ridho BashirAKA: Rashid Rida Ba’asyirAKA: Rashid Rida BashirDOB: 31 January 1974POB: Sukoharjo, IndonesiaNationality: IndonesianNational Identity Card No.: 1127083101740003, IndonesianAddress: Pondok Pesantren Al Wayain Ngrandu,Sumber Agung Magetan, East Java, Indonesia.

###

​
