---
title: Treasury Announces Additional Sanctions Against Iranian Engineering and Shipping Firms
date: 2012-03-28
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1509
---
*(Archived Content)*

  **WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury announced today additional sanctions against two entities connected to the network of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and two individuals and two entities affiliated with Iran's national maritime carrier, the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines (IRISL). Today's actions further expose IRGC and IRISL continued involvement in illicit activities and deceptive behavior.

Pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13382 – an authority aimed at freezing the assets of proliferators of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their supporters and thereby isolating them from the U.S. financial and commercial systems – Treasury today designated the following entities and individuals.

- Iran Maritime Industrial Company SADRA (SADRA), an entity owned by the IRGC's Khatam al-Anbiya
- Deep Offshore Technology PJS, a subsidiary of SADRA
- Malship Shipping Agency Ltd., an IRISL affiliate
- Modality Limited, an IRISL affiliate
- Seyed Alaeddin Sadat Rasool, an IRISL official
- Ali Ezati, an IRISL official

“By designating the individuals and entities today, Treasury is sending a clear signal to the international community that Iran’s attempts to evade international sanctions will not go unnoticed. We will continue to target the Iranian regime and specifically the IRGC as it attempts to continue its nefarious infiltration of the Iranian economy,” said Adam Szubin, Director of Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC).

The IRGC continues to be a primary focus of U.S. and international sanctions against Iran because of the central role the IRGC plays in Iran's missile and nuclear programs, its support for terrorism, and its involvement in serious human rights abuses. Similarly, IRISL has played a key role in Iran's efforts to advance its missile programs and transport other military cargoes. The IRGC has continued to expand its control over the Iranian economy – in particular in the defense production, construction, and oil and gas industries – subsuming increasing numbers of Iranian businesses and pressing them into service in support of the IRGC's illicit conduct.

**IRGC Designations**SADRA which has offices in Iran and Venezuela is being designated for being owned or controlled by Khatam al-Anbiya. OFAC designated Khatam al-Anbiya in October 2007 under E.O. 13382 as an engineering arm of the IRGC that the IRGC uses to generate income and fund its operations. The U.S. Department of State designated the IRGC in October 2007 under E.O. 13382 Section (1)(a)(ii), for engaging, or attempting to engage, in activities or transactions that have materially contributed to, or pose a risk of materially contributing to, the proliferation of WMD or their means of delivery.

Deep Offshore Technology PJS is being designated today under E.O. 13382 because it is wholly-owned by SADRA.

Treasury has also determined that SADRA and Deep Offshore Technology PJS are agents or affiliates of the IRGC for purposes of the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act of 2010 (CISADA).  Accordingly, any foreign financial institution knowingly conducting significant transactions with or on behalf of SADRA or Deep Offshore Technology PJS faces potential loss of its correspondent account access to the United States.

**IRISL Designations**Treasury is also designating today two IRISL front companies based in Malta: Modality Limited and Malship Shipping Agency Ltd.  Both companies are owned by IRISL executive Mansour Eslami, who was designated in October 2010 for his role as director of an IRISL subsidiary, IRISL (Malta) Ltd., and for his co-management of several IRISL-affiliated holding companies.

Two IRISL employees were also designated today including a senior IRISL legal advisor, Seyed Alaeddin Sadat Rasool, and Ali Ezati, IRISL's Strategic Planning and Public Affairs Manager.

IRISL was designated by Treasury pursuant to E.O. 13382 in September 2008 for its provision of logistical services to Iran's Ministry of Defense and Armed Forces Logistics (MODAFL), the arm of the Iranian military that oversees its ballistic missile program.

**Identifying Information**

1. EZATI, Ali (a.k.a. EZZATI, Ali); DOB 5 Jun 1963; Passport Z19579335 (Iran) (individual) [NPWMD]

2. RASOOL, Seyed Alaeddin Sadat; DOB 23 Jul 1965 (individual) [NPWMD]

3. DEEP OFFSHORE TECHNOLOGY COMPANY PJS, 1st Floor, Sadra Building, No. 3, Shafagh Street, Shahid Dadman Boulevard, Paknejad Boulevard, 7th Phase, Shahrake-E-Quds, Tehran, Iran [IRGC] [NPWMD]

4. IRAN MARINE INDUSTRIAL COMPANY, SADRA (a.k.a. IRAN MARINE INDUSTRIAL COMPANY SSA; a.k.a. IRAN SADRA; a.k.a. IRAN SHIP BUILDING CO.; a.k.a. SADRA; a.k.a. SHERKATE SANATI DARYAI IRAN), 3rd Floor Aftab Building, No. 3 Shafagh Street, Dadman Blvd, Phase 7, Shahrak Ghods, P.O. Box 14665-495, Tehran, Iran; Office E-43 Torre E- Piso 4, Centrao Commercial Lido Av., Francisco de Miranda, Caracas, Venezuela; Website www.sadra.ir [IRGC] [NPWMD]

5. MALSHIP SHIPPING AGENCY LTD., 143/1 Tower Road, Sliema, Malta; Commercial Registry Number C43447 (Malta) [NPWMD]

6. MODALITY LIMITED, 2, Liza, Fl. 5, Triq Il-Prekursur, Madliena, Swieqi, Malta; Commercial Registry Number C49549 (Malta) [NPWMD]

###
