---
title: Treasury Department Announces Pricing of Public Offering of Sterling Financial Corporation Common Stock
date: 2012-08-14
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1680
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced that it priced a secondary public offering of the 5,738,637 shares of common stock of Sterling Financial Corporation (the “Company”) it holds at $20.00 per share. The aggregate net proceeds to Treasury from the offering are expected to be $113.3 million.After this offering, Treasury will no longer hold any shares of the Company’s common stock. Treasury will continue to hold warrants to purchase 97,541 shares of the Company’s common stock – the disposition of which will provide additional proceeds to taxpayers.Treasury’s initial preferred stock investment in the Company,made as part of the Troubled Asset Relief Program’s (TARP) Capital Purchase Program,was exchanged for common stock on August 26, 2010 as part of a larger recapitalization of the Company.TARP’s bank programs have already earned a significant profit for taxpayers. Including the expected proceeds from today’s transaction, Treasury has recovered $265 billion from TARP’s bank programs through repayments, dividends, interest, and other income – compared to the $245 billion initially invested. Each additional dollar recovered from TARP’s bank programs is an additional dollar of profit for taxpayers.The closing is expected to occur on or about August 20, 2012, subject to customary closing conditions. FBR Capital Markets & Co. and Sandler O’Neill + Partners, L.P. are the joint bookrunning managers for the offering. A registration statement relating to the shares in this offering and shares held by certain other selling shareholders was previously filed by the Company and declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). A preliminary prospectus relating to the offering was filed by Sterling on August 14, 2012, and a final prospectus, when available, will be filed by Sterling with the SEC. These filings are (or will be) available on the SEC’s website at[www.sec.gov](http://www.sec.gov/).Before you invest, you should read the prospectus supplement and the prospectus in the registration statement and other documents the issuer has filed with the SEC for more complete information about the issuer and this offering. You may get these documents for free by visiting EDGAR on the SEC website at www.sec.gov. Alternatively, the underwriters of the offering will arrange to send you the prospectus if you request it. Copies of the prospectus supplements relating to the offering may be obtained, when available, from FBR Capital Markets & Co., Attention: Syndicate Prospectus Department, 1001 Nineteenth Street North, Arlington, Virginia 22209, Telephone: 703-312-9500, Email:[prospectuses@fbr.com](mailto:prospectuses@fbr.com); and from Sandler O’Neill + Partners, L.P., 1251 Avenue of the Americas, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10020, Telephone: (866) 805-4128, Email:[syndicate@sandleroneill.com](mailto:syndicate@sandleroneill.com).This news release shall not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy, nor shall there be any sale of these securities in any state or jurisdiction in which such offer, solicitation or sale would be unlawful prior to registration or qualification under the securities laws of any such state or jurisdiction.Today’s sale is part of Treasury's ongoing efforts to exit its remaining TARP investments and recover taxpayer dollars. Nearly 84 percent ($349 billion) of the $416 billion funds disbursed for TARP have already been recovered to date through repayments and other income. For more details on Treasury’s lifetime cost estimates for TARP programs, please visit Treasury’s Monthly 105(a) Report to Congress on TARP at this[link]( /sites/default/files/initiatives/financial-stability/reports/Documents/June-2012-Monthly-Report-to-Congress.pdf).# # #
