---
title: Treasury Designates Key Members of the Brothers' Circle Criminal Organization
date: 2012-12-20
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1811
---
*(Archived Content)*

  

**WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated another key member of the Eurasian crime syndicate, the Brothers’ Circle, as well as two criminal associates of an individual who was previously designated for operating on behalf of the organization. These designations were made pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13581, which targets entities or individuals determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Attorney General and the Secretary of State, to be significant transnational criminal organizations (TCOs) or to have links to such organizations.   The Brothers’ Circle is one of five TCOs sanctioned under E.O. 13581, along with the Camorra, the Yakuza, Los Zetas, and MS-13. Over the past year, the Treasury Department has designated 12 individuals associated with the Brothers’ Circle.

  

Today’s action targets Zakhariy Kalashov for acting for or on behalf of, or providing material support to, the Brothers’ Circle, as well as Almanbet Anapiyaev and Adilet Kasenov, for acting for or on behalf of, or providing material support to, Kamychbek Kolbayev, who was designated under E.O. 13581 on February 23, 2012. Kolbayev had previously been designated under the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act on June 1, 2011. Kolbayev is currently in custody in Kyrgyzstan.

  

“This action further illuminates the Brothers’ Circle illicit network, and will help squeeze them out of the global financial system and protect the U.S. financial system from the group’s laundering of its criminal proceeds. We will continue to pursue members and supporters of the Brothers’ Circle, and today’s action against the group’s leadership will help us cast an even larger net to expose their financial facilitators and associates wherever they operate,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.

  

President Obama identified the Brothers’ Circle as a significant TCO in the Annex to E.O. 13581 on July 24, 2011, and charged the Treasury Department with pursuing additional sanctions against its members and supporters. Today’s action freezes any assets the designees may have within the jurisdiction of the United States and prohibits any transactions with them by U.S. persons. These efforts protect the U.S. financial system from transnational criminal organizations and expose and disrupt the actions of individuals who are supporting or acting for or on behalf of the Brothers’ Circle.

  

The Brothers' Circle is a criminal group composed of leaders and senior members of several Eurasian criminal groups that are largely based in countries of the former Soviet Union, but also operate in Europe, the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America. The Brothers' Circle serves as a coordinating body for several criminal networks, mediates disputes between the individual criminal networks, and directs member criminal activity globally.

  

Zakhariy Kalashov is a key member of the Brothers’ Circle. He is a prominent Eurasian organized crime figure and close associate of Lasha Shushanashvilli, who was also designated under E.O. 13581 on June 6, 2012. He has extensive connections to criminal groups in Russia and countries throughout Eurasia. According to law enforcement authorities, his criminal activities include money laundering, extortion, criminal protection, and trafficking in both arms and drugs. In June 2005, Kalashov escaped a Spanish police operation and fled to the United Arab Emirates (UAE), where he was arrested in 2006. After being extradited by the UAE to Spain, a Spanish court sentenced Kalashov to a 9-year prison term and imposed a 22.5 million Euro fine on him.

  

Almanbet Anapiyaev is a key associate of Kamchybek Kolbayev. Anapiyaev has been described as the deputy and “muscle” of Kolbayev’s criminal organization. A former police officer in Kyrgyzstan, Anapiyaev was fired for his ties to organized crime. Currently, Anapiyaev is subject to an Interpol Red Notice, a Kyrgyzstani arrest warrant, and he has been named to Kyrgyzstan’s Most Wanted List for kidnapping, illegal confinement, and robbery.

  

Adilet Kasenov is an active member of Kamchybek Kolbayev’s criminal organization, serving as treasurer and as Kolbayev’s bodyguard. Kasenov reportedly also serves as the “criminal governor” of the Issyk-Kul region of Kyrgyzstan. Kyrgyzstan has named Kasenov to its Most Wanted List for using violence against a government official, as well as for the illegal sale and possession of firearms and explosive devices. Kasenov is currently in custody in Kyrgyzstan.





**Identifying Information:**



****



****



****



**Name: Zakhary Knyazevich Kalashov**



AKA: Sachary Knyasevich Kalaschov



AKA: Sergio Kalashov



AKA: Zakhar Kniezivich Kalashov



AKA: Zakhary Kniazevich Kalasiiov



AKA: Zakaria Kniaz Kalashov



AKA: Zacharias Kalasov



AKA: Zachari Kalaschow



AKA: Zachari Kalahov



AKA: Zahar Kalashov



AKA: Zahariy Kalashov



AKA: Zajar Kalashov



AKA: Zakhar Kalashov



AKA: Zakhar Kalashov



AKA: Zakhari Kalashov



AKA: Zakhariy Kalashov



AKA: Zakahary Kalash



AKA: Zaxar Kalasov



AKA: Shakro Kurti



AKA: Shakro Molodoy



AKA: Shakro Maladoi



AKA: Shakro The Young



AKA: Shakro Junio



DOB: March 20, 1953



Alt. DOB: 1963



POB: Tbilisi, Georgia



Passport: 60-4145924 (Russia)



Alt. Passport: 60-4145934 (Russia)



Citizen: Georgia



Alt. Citizen: Russia



Address: General Tyulenev Street, 7, Building 2; Apartment 277; Moscow, Russia



Alt. Address: Varketili Masivi, 4th Block, 1st Building, Flat #30, Tbilisi, Georgia

  

**Name: Almanbet Mamadaminovich Anapiyaev**



AKA: Almanbet Anapiyayev



AKA: Almanbet Anapiyev



AKA: Almanbael Anapiyaev



AKA: Almambet Anapiyaeva



AKA: Almanebet Alaiskii



AKA: Almanbet Alay



DOB: August 17, 1973



POB: Osh region, Kyrgyzstan



Alt. POB: Zhkendi Village, Alai Region, Kyrgyzstan



Nationality: Kyrgyzstan

  

**Name: Adilet Zhakypovich Kasenov**



DOB: June 8, 1983



POB: Naryn, Kyrgyzstan



Nationality: Kyrgyzstan



Passport: AC1049097 (Kyrgyzstan)

  

###​
