---
title: Treasury Designates Lorenzana Family Members and Businesses Allied with the Sinaloa Cartel
date: 2012-11-14
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1767
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Action Targets Powerful Guatemalan Drug Trafficker WASHINGTON  –**The U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today designated two key operatives connected to Waldemar Lorenzana Lima, one of Guatemala’s most powerful drug traffickers, as Specially Designated Narcotics Traffickers (SDNTs) pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act).  For years, Waldemar Lorenzana Lima has used his businesses and agricultural holdings in La Reforma, Zacapa, Guatemala as a front for the northbound movement of drugs through Guatemala.  Today, OFAC designated Ovaldino Lorenzana Cordon and Marta Julia Lorenzana Cordon for their role in the drug trafficking activities of their father, Lorenzana Lima as well as the Lorenzana family’s extensive business network.

In April 2010, OFAC designated Lorenzana Lima and three of his sons for their role in facilitating the narcotics-trafficking activities of the Sinaloa Cartel in Guatemala.  Today’s action prohibits U.S. persons from conducting financial or commercial transactions with the eight designated entities and two designated individuals, and freezes any assets they may have under U.S. jurisdiction.

“Treasury will continue to target major drug cartels wherever they are operating, including family organizations that work together to traffic narcotics.  Today’s designation of Marta Julia and Ovaldino Lorenzana Cordon, members of one of Guatemala’s most significant crime families, along with the Lorenzanas’ business network, allows us to continue our efforts to dismantle transnational drug trafficking organizations operating in Guatemala,” said OFAC Director Adam J. Szubin.

The Lorenzana drug trafficking organization plays a key role in facilitating cocaine trafficking between Colombia and Mexico. Through their connections with Colombian suppliers, they utilize their home country of Guatemala as a staging point for cocaine shipments. Once the cocaine arrives in Guatemala, the Lorenzana family works with the Sinaloa Cartel to traffic cocaine into Mexico and, eventually, the United States. Guatemalan authorities arrested Lorenzana Lima and one of his sons, Eliu Elixander Lorenzana Cordon, in April 2011 and November 2011, respectively. They remain in custody pending extradition to the U.S.​

The designations announced today are the latest in a series of efforts by OFAC to thwart transnational drug cartels, such as the Sinaloa Cartel, which are responsible for distributing significant amounts of cocaine, marijuana, and methamphetamine to the United States.  President Obama identified the Sinaloa Cartel as a significant foreign narcotics trafficker under the Kingpin Act in April 2009.

Today’s action, supported by the Drug Enforcement Administration, is part of OFAC’s ongoing efforts under the Kingpin Act to apply financial measures against significant foreign narcotics traffickers worldwide.  Internationally, OFAC has designated more than 1,100 businesses and individuals linked to 97 drug kingpins since June 2000.  Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties.  Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines of up to $5 million.  Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million. Other individuals face up to 10 years in prison and fines for criminal violation of the Kingpin Act pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code.

​​

*View a chart of the Lorenzana organization.​. *

* *

 

###​
