---
title: Treasury Announces Public Offering of AIG Common Stock
date: 2012-09-09T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1700
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** –Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced that it has launched an underwritten public offering of $18.0 billion of its American International Group, Inc. (AIG) common stock.  AIG has indicated that it intends to purchase up to $5.0 billion of the common stock sold by Treasury in this offering at the initial public offering price. Treasury will also grant to the underwriters in the offering a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional $2.7 billion in common stock from Treasury to cover over-allotments, if any.

Citigroup, Deutsche Bank Securities Inc., Goldman, Sachs & Co., and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC have been retained as joint global coordinators. Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated, Barclays Capital Inc., Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, RBC Capital Markets, LLC, UBS Securities LLC, Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC and Macquarie Capital (USA) Inc. have been retained as joint bookrunners for the offering.

The offering will be made under AIG's shelf registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and only by means of a prospectus supplement and accompanying prospectus. When available, a copy of the prospectus supplement and accompanying prospectus relating to the offering may be obtained from the Securities and Exchange Commission's Web site at[www.sec.gov](http://www.sec.gov/)or by contacting any of (i) Citigroup Global Markets Inc., Attn: Prospectus Department,  Brooklyn Army Terminal, 140 58th Street, 8th Floor, Brooklyn, New York 11220, by calling 1-800-831-9146  or emailing[batprospectusdept@citi.com](mailto:batprospectusdept@citi.com), (ii) Deutsche Bank Securities Inc., Attn: Prospectus Group, 60 Wall Street, New York, NY 10005-2836, by calling 1-800-503-4611, or by emailing[prospectus.cpdg@db.com](mailto:prospectus.cpdg@db.com), (iii) Goldman, Sachs & Co. Attn: Prospectus Department, 200 West Street, New York, NY 10282, by calling toll-free 866-471-2526, by faxing 212-902-9316 or by emailing[prospectus-ny@ny.gmail.gs.com](mailto:prospectus-ny@ny.gmail.gs.com), or (iv) J.P. Morgan Securities LLC,  c/o Broadridge Financial Solutions, 1155 Long Island Avenue, Edgewood, NY 11717, by calling 866 803-9204.

###
