---
title: Sara Margalit Aviel Confirmed as Alternate Executive Director at the World Bank
date: 2012-05-25T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1595
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – Sara Margalit Aviel was confirmed by the United States Senate yesterday to serve as the Alternate Executive Director to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank).  In this capacity, Aviel will work with the Executive Director to represent the United States on the Board of Directors, which makes decisions about loan and investment proposals, reviews the policy issues that guide the general operations of the Bank, and provides broad oversight of, and guidance to, the Bank’s senior management.

Avi

el has served as Director of International Economic Affairs at the National Security Council and the National Economic Council since 2011.  Shehas also served as a Senior Advisor to Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner.

“I have seen firsthand the depth of Sara’s personal dedication and drive in all she does. Sara’s rich experience in international development issues will be a valuable asset to the United States and the World Bank in this new role,” said Secretary Geithner.

Prior to joining Treasury, Aviel served on the leadership team of Root Capital, a social investment fund.  Aviel previously spent time at Mercy Corps, CARE Afghanistan, and as a lecturer at Yale University.

A

viel received a B.A. and M.A. in Political Science from Yale University and a Master’s in Business Administration from the Yale School of Management.

###
