---
title: Alastair MacLennan Fitzpayne Confirmed as Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs
date: 2012-03-30
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1515
---
*(Archived Content)*

  **WASHINGTON** – Alastair MacLennan Fitzpayne was confirmed by the United States Senate yesterday to serve as the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs.  As Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs, Fitzpayne will advise Secretary Geithner on legislative strategy, communicate Treasury's priorities to Congress, and keep the Department informed of Congressional objectives and concerns.

Fitzpayne has served as Treasury’s deputy chief of staff since January 2009.  He has also served as the Department’s Executive Secretary since April 2010.

“Al has been an integral part of the Treasury leadership team since the early days of this Administration.  His deep knowledge of Congress and the legislative process is also held in high regard throughout Washington and will be an incredibly valuable asset to me and the Department in this new role,” said Treasury Secretary Geithner.  “I am pleased that the Senate moved to confirm this qualified nominee.”

Prior to joining Treasury, Fitzpayne served as a member of the Economics and International Trade Agency Review Team on the Obama-Biden Transition Team assigned to the Department of the Treasury.  Fitzpayne previously spent eight years working on Capitol Hill.  He served as a legislative assistant to former Sen. Evan Bayh, advising him on tax, budget, small business, and technology issues.  He served as senior policy advisor for former Rep. Rahm Emanuel and advised him on tax, budget, and financial services issues while Emanuel was Democratic Caucus Chair and a Member of the House Ways and Means Committee.  He has also been a Presidential Management Fellow at the Office of Management and Budget.

Fitzpayne received a B.A. from Vassar College and Master’s in Public Policy from the University of California, Berkeley.  He is married to Jill Morningstar, and has a daughter, Leah, and son, Benjamin.

###​
