---
title: 'Treasury Expands Sanctions Against Sinaloa Cartel Drug Lord "El Azul"'
date: 2012-10-10T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1732
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Action Targets Two Additional Mexican Companies WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated two entities linked to Juan Jose Esparragoza Moreno (a.k.a. El Azul), a leader of Mexico’s Sinaloa Cartel.  Today’s action, pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act), prohibits U.S. persons from conducting financial or commercial transactions with these entities and individuals, and also freezes any assets they may have under U.S. jurisdiction.

“Today’s action serves as a reminder to Esparragoza Moreno that he and his organization remain in our sights,” said Treasury Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) Director Adam J. Szubin.  “Numerous entities within the Mexican private sector have voluntarily severed ties with Esparragoza Moreno’s corporate network, helping to significantly disrupt and isolate this organization.  However, it should be noted that any company or individual that continues to act on behalf of or support this network could become the target of sanctions.”

The President identified Esparragoza Moreno and the Sinaloa Cartel as significant foreign narcotics traffickers pursuant to the Kingpin Act in 2003 and 2009, respectively.  Esparragoza Moreno was indicted on drug trafficking charges in the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Texas in 2003.  He is wanted in both the U.S. and Mexico.  The U.S. State Department Narcotics Rewards Program is offering a reward of up to $5 million for information leading to Esparragoza Moreno’s arrest and/or conviction while Mexican authorities are offering 30 million pesos for information leading to his capture.  Esparragoza Moreno has been active in drug trafficking since the 1970s.

Today’s action targets two Mexican entities.*Socialika Rentas y Catering, S.A. de C.V.*is an event planning company registered in Cancun that owns and operates*Terraza 9140*, a banquet hall in Zapopan, a town near Guadalajara.*Socialika Rentas y Catering, S.A. de C.V.*is owned and managed by Brenda Guadalupe Esparragoza Moreno, the daughter of Esparragoza Moreno who was previously designated because she acts on behalf of her father.*Urbanizadora Nueva Italia, S.A. de C.V.*, a real estate company located in Guadalajara, is the other entity designated today.  This company is owned and managed by Juvencio Ignacio Gonzalez Parada, who was previously designated because he acts on behalf of Esparragoza Moreno.*Urbanizadora Nueva Italia, S.A. de C.V.*sells homes at the previously-designated residential community*Provenza Residencial*, which is controlled by Esparragoza Moreno and is located in Tlajomulco de Zuniga, a town near Guadalajara.

The designation of these two entities follows a previous Treasury action targeting Esparragoza Moreno.  On July 24, 2012, Treasury designated nine entities and ten individuals linked to Esparragoza Moreno.  The entities include the Tlajomulco de Zuniga-based property management companies*Grupo Cinjab, S.A. de C.V.*, which manages the aforementioned*Provenza Residencial*, and*Grupo Impergoza, S.A. de C.V.*, which manages the*Provenza Center*shopping mall and the*La Tijera Parque Industrial*warehouse facility.  Also designated on that day were seven gas station companies located in Culiacan, Sinaloa:*Buenos Aires Servicios, S.A. de C.V.*,*Estaciones de Servicios Canarias, S.A. de C.V.*,*Gasodiesel y Servicios Ancona, S.A. de C.V.*,*Gasolinera Alamos Country, S.A. de C.V.*,*Gasolinera y Servicios Villabonita, S.A. de C.V.*,*Petrobarrancos, S.A. de C.V.*, and*Servicios Chulavista, S.A. de C.V.*

Today’s action would not have been possible without the support of the Drug Enforcement Administration.

Internationally, Treasury has designated more than 1,100 businesses and individuals linked to 97 drug kingpins since June 2000.  Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties.  Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million. Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million.  Other individuals could face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.

*To view a chart of the Esparragoza Moreno Organization, see link.*

###
