---
title: Treasury Imposes Sanctions on Pakistan-Based Terrorist Facilitators
date: 2012-10-17
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1739
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Actions Target Supporters of the Taliban, Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan, and the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan**   **WASHINGTON –** The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the designation of three Pakistan-based terrorist facilitators – Maulawi Adam Khan Achekzai (Adam), Aamir Ali Chaudhry (Chaudhry), and Qari Ayyub Bashir (Bashir) – pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224 for providing material, logistical, or financial support to the Taliban, Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan (TTP), and the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU), respectively.  Adam and Chaudhry have been involved in the production of improvised and other explosive devices, while Bashir coordinated financial support for IMU operations in Afghanistan and Pakistan.     “Today’s actions are intended to disrupt the activities of three individuals working to carry out violent attacks in Afghanistan and Pakistan that threaten the lives of civilians and military forces.” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “As these designations demonstrate, we will continue to work to dismantle the terrorist support networks operating in Afghanistan and Pakistan, paying special attention to those involved in the manufacture of IEDs.”   Today’s designations freeze any assets Adam, Chaudhry, or Bashir hold under U.S. jurisdiction and prohibit U.S. persons from engaging in transactions with these parties.  E.O. 13224 targets terrorists, terrorist organizations, individuals and entities owned or controlled by or acting for or on behalf of designated terrorists or terrorist organizations, and those providing financial, material, or technological support or financial or other services to designated terrorists or terrorist organizations, or for acts of terrorism.   The Taliban was listed in the Annex to E.O. 13224 on July 2, 2002; TTP was designated pursuant to E.O. 13224 on September 1, 2010; and the IMU was designated pursuant to E.O. 13224 on September 23, 2001.   **Maulawi Adam Khan Achekzai**   Adam is an improvised explosive device (IED) manufacturer and facilitator for the Taliban.  As of late 2010, Adam was a Taliban military commander who was responsible for the production of IEDs and suicide vests.  Furthermore, as of 2012, Adam constructed IEDs and trained approximately 150 IED makers in support of the Taliban.  Adam was previously a deputy of Taliban IED facilitator Abdul Samad and, as Samad's deputy, coordinated procurement activities for the network. Abdul Samad was named a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) and was listed at the U.N. on March 2, 2012.   In addition to his IED facilitation duties, Adam has filled other leadership roles for the Taliban.  In mid-2010, Adam was named the Taliban shadow governor for Badghis Province, Afghanistan.  Adam is also the former Taliban shadow governor of Sar-e Pul and Samangan Provinces, Afghanistan.  As a Taliban military commander in Qandahar Province, Afghanistan, Adam was involved in organizing suicide attacks in neighboring provinces.   **Aamir Ali Chaudhry**   Chaudhry is a TTP operative and has served as an electronics and explosives expert for TTP.  As of early 2010, Chaudhry advised a TTP facilitator on fertilizer selection for the bomb used in the failed May 2010 attack in New York's Times Square.  As of mid-2010, Chaudhry manufactured and prepared circuit boards for explosive devices.  He was also responsible for TTP's electronic needs with regard to producing landmines and IEDs.   Chaudhry has also been involved in attack planning for TTP.  As of mid-2010, Chaudhry was involved in a TTP plan to conduct a rocket attack against the Pakistani parliament building and was leading TTP's efforts to develop a chemical poison.  In early 2010, Chaudhry was working on a TTP plot to detonate explosives on an aircraft and had been working on a plan to use an airliner in an attack.  In addition, Chaudhry volunteered to conduct a suicide operation in support of TTP during this period.   Chaudhry is also involved in other activities for TTP.  As of mid-2011, Chaudhry was preparing a location in Pakistan to be a media production center for TTP.  As of mid-2010, Chaudhry took instructions from now-deceased TTP leader Qari Hussein and provided financial and logistical support to TTP.  Earlier, Chaudhry was tasked with establishing a TTP network outside of Pakistan and, in late 2009, had selected a group of people that would be used by Qari Hussein to disseminate TTP messages.  As of 2009, Chaudhry had joined TTP and traveled to Pakistan's Federally Administered Tribal Areas to participate in TTP-­sponsored militant training.   **Qari Ayyub Bashir**   Bashir is the head of finance for the IMU and, as of early 2010, was a member of the IMU leadership council, or shura.  Between 2009 and 2011, Bashir coordinated financial support for IMU operations in Afghanistan and Pakistan.  Among his financial support activities, Bashir received funds from sources in Turkey and elsewhere in Europe and delivered these funds to a senior IMU leader.  Bashir has also transferred and delivered funds to IMU facilitator Fazal Rahim, who was named an SDGT pursuant to E.O. 13224 on September 29, 2011.   Bashir also coordinated logistic support for IMU operations in Afghanistan and Pakistan between 2010 and 2012 and has had significant ties to Afghanistan- and Pakistan-based IMU commanders. As of mid-2009, Bashir led attacks against Afghan police in Kunduz Province, Afghanistan, and recruited IMU fighters at his madrassa in Pakistan. Bashir has also facilitated travel for new IMU recruits and led an anti-Coalition militia in Kunduz and Takhar Provinces in Afghanistan under the control of former IMU leader Tohir Yuldashev. Yuldashev was named an SDGT pursuant to E.O. 13224 on October 12, 2001.   **IDENTIFYING INFORMATION**   **Individual: Maulawi Adam Khan Achekzai  ** AKA: Maulawi Adam Khan AKA: Molawi Adam DOB: 1972 Alt. DOB: 1970 Alt. DOB: 1971 Alt. DOB: 1973 Alt. DOB: 1974 Alt. DOB: 1975 POB: Qandahar, Afghanistan Citizenship: Pakistan Address: Chaman, Balochistan Province, Pakistan   **Individual: Aamir Ali Chaudhry                                         ** AKA: Aamir Ali Chaudary AKA: Aamir Ali Choudry                  AKA: Amir Ali Chaudry AKA: Huzaifa DOB: 3 August 1986 Nationality: Pakistani Passport information: Pakistan, BN4196361 Issued 28 October 2008 Expires 27 October 2013 National identity card number: Pakistan, 33202-7126636-9   **Individual: Qari Ayyub Bashir** AKA: Alhaj Qari Ayub Bashar AKA: Qari Muhammad Ayub AKA: Ayob Bashir DOB: 1966 Alt. DOB: 1964 Alt. DOB: 1969 Alt. DOB: 1971 Nationality: Uzbek Alt. Nationality: Afghan Address: Mir Ali, North Waziristan Agency, Federal Administered Tribal Areas, Pakistan 
###
