---
title: Treasury Announces Marketable Borrowing Estimates
date: 2012-04-30T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1556
---
*(Archived Content)*

**View the Sources and Uses Table here WASHINGTON -** The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced its current estimates of net marketable borrowing for the April - June and July – September 2012 quarters:

During the April - June 2012 quarter, Treasury expects to issue $182 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-June cash balance of $95 billion.  This borrowing estimate is $19 billion lower than announced in January 2012.  The decrease is primarily due to projections of lower outlays and higher issuances of State and Local Government securities, partially offset by lower receipts.

During the July - September 2012 quarter, Treasury expects to issue $265 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-September cash balance of $95 billion.

During the January - March 2012 quarter, Treasury issued $401 billion in net marketable debt, and ended the quarter with a cash balance of $43 billion.  In January 2012, Treasury estimated $444 billion in net marketable borrowing and assumed an end-of-March cash balance of $30 billion.  The higher cash balance and lower borrowing were driven primarily by lower-than-projected outlays and higher net issuances of State and Local Government Securities.

Additional financing details relating to Treasury’s Quarterly Refunding will be released at 9:00 a.m. on Wednesday, May 2, 2012.

###
