---
title: Treasury Sanctions Members and Associates of Japanese Criminal Organization
date: 2012-09-27
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1722
---
*(Archived Content)*

​**Actions Target the Second-Largest Clan within the Japanese Yakuza Criminal Network for Activities Including Human Trafficking WASHINGTON –** The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the designation of the Sumiyoshi-kai, the second-largest clan within the Japanese Yakuza criminal network, and two of its leaders. This group and individuals are being designated by the Treasury Department pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13581, which targets significant transnational criminal organizations (TCOs) and their supporters.   President Obama identified the Yakuza as a significant TCO in the Annex to E.O. 13581 of July 24, 2011.  Since then, the Treasury Department has targeted the Yakuza by designating the Yamaguchi-gumi (the largest and most prominent of the Yakuza’s crime families) and two of its leaders.    “Through this action, we will continue to work toward disrupting the criminal activities of the Yakuza and dismantling its financial network,” said Treasury Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “Today’s designation of the Sumiyoshi-kai also supports the Administration’s intensified efforts to combat trafficking in persons given the Yakuza’s long-standing involvement in sex trafficking throughout Asia.”     Today, the Treasury Department is continuing to target this criminal group and disrupt its activities by identifying another key Yakuza organization and its leaders, freezing any assets they may have within the jurisdiction of the United States and prohibiting any transactions with them by U.S. persons.  These efforts are designed to protect the U.S. financial system from the malign influence of transnational criminal organizations and expose the individuals who are supporting or acting on behalf of the Yakuza.   The Yakuza and its crime clans, including the Sumiyoshi-kai, are involved in serious criminal activities, including weapons trafficking, prostitution, human trafficking, drug trafficking, fraud, and money laundering.  The Sumiyoshi-kai is the second-largest and most prominent of the Yakuza organizations, and the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is targeting it today for acting for or on behalf of the Yakuza.   Today’s action also imposes sanctions on Shigeo Nishiguchi, the top Sumiyoshi-kai leader  as well as the Sumiyoshi-kai’s deputy, Hareaki Fukuda, both for acting for or on behalf of the Sumiyoshi-kai.  As leaders of the Sumiyoshi-kai, both Nishiguchi and Fukuda play key roles in directing the syndicate’s policies and settling disputes with other Yakuza syndicates.** Identifiers  Entity:            SUMIYOSHI-KAI,** Address:          6-4-21 Akasaka, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan** Individual:     FUKUDA, Hareaki,** Address:          c/o 6-4-21 Akasaka, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan DOB:              1943 to 1944** Individual:     NISHIGUCHI, Shigeo** Address:          c/o 6-4-21 Akasaka, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan DOB:              1929 to 1930   ###
