---
title: Treasury Designates Two Lieutenants of South Asian Criminal Organization
date: 2012-05-15T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1579
---
*(Archived Content)*

​

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today designated Chhota Shakeel and Ibrahim “Tiger” Memon as Specially Designated Narcotics Traffickers pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act) for their roles as part of a criminal organization run by Dawood Ibrahim, known as “D Company.”Dawood Ibrahim was named as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist in October 2003, and in June 2006, he was named by the President as a Significant Foreign Narcotics Trafficker. Also in June 2006, the Dawood Ibrahim Organization was named by the President as a Significant Foreign Narcotics Trafficker.“Treasury continues to target the nexus of crime and terrorism in South Asia with today’s action against one of the world’s most notorious criminal organizations,” said OFAC Director Adam Szubin.Chhota Shakeel is Dawood’s lieutenant who coordinates for D Company with other organized crime and terror groups. Ibrahim “Tiger” Memon is a trusted lieutenant who controls the organization’s businesses across South Asia and is wanted by Indian authorities for his involvement in the 1993 Mumbai bombings. INTERPOL has issued provisional arrest warrants or “red notices” for both Shakeel and Memon, who are Indian nationals. Dawood Ibrahim and his organization have been involved in international narcotics trafficking activities since the late 1980s.Their smuggling routes include South Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. Drug trafficking activities of D Company include the smuggling of heroin and hashish from Afghanistan and Thailand to the United States, Western Europe, the Middle East, Latin America, and Africa.As a result of today's action, U.S. persons are prohibited from conducting financial or commercial transactions with Chhota Shakeel and Ibrahim “Tiger” Memon, and any assets they may have under U.S. jurisdiction are frozen.The Treasury Department continues to target the financial networks of significant foreign narcotics traffickers and their organizations worldwide using the authorities in the Kingpin Act.  Treasury has designated more than 1,100 individuals and entities linked to drug kingpins since June 2000.  Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties.  Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million.  Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million.  Other individuals face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.To view a chart of the Dawood Ibrahim organization, visit this[link](http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/05112012_dawood.pdf).*###*
