---
title: MyMoneyAppUp Partners Announce the Expert Judges for the Mobile App Design Challenge
date: 2012-07-24
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1651
---
*(Archived Content)*

**** **​WASHINGTON -** The U.S. Department of the Treasury (Treasury), the D2D Fund (D2D), and Center for Financial Services Innovation (CFSI), today announced the expert judges for MyMoneyAppUp, a challenge offering cash prizes and recognition for the best mobile app ideas and designs to help Americans make smart financial choices, access high quality financial products and services, and ultimately control and shape their financial futures.   

:

  

**Chris Bishko**, Director, Investments at Omidyar NetworkChris Bishko leads Omidyar Network’s investments in U.S. technology-enabled financial services companies.**Jean Chatzky**Jean Chatzky is an award-winning personal finance journalist, best-selling author and television personality who specializes in making money make sense.**Katie Burke Mitic,**Director, Platform Marketing at FacebookKatie Mitic leads platform marketing for Facebook, with responsibility for shaping and growing innovative products for millions of developers and businesses that engage with Facebook’s community of over 900+ million users.



**Sendhil Mullainathan**, Professor of Economics at Harvard University & Founder of ideas42



Sendhil Mullainathan is a Professor and Founder of ideas42, a non-profit behavioral economics ideas lab devoted to turning insights about people from behavioral economics into policies, interventions, and products that solve some of the world toughest problems.**Carol Realini**



Carol Realini is a globally recognized banking innovator and mobile payment pioneer as well as a successful serial entrepreneur, author, and board member. She is passionate about the potential of mobile to enable financial services that empower people’s life and work.

  

**Jonathan Weiner**, Business Development, Payments at Google



Jonathan Weiner is a recognized leader and proven entrepreneur with a consistent track record of creating and managing successful business ventures.

  

Judges will select App Design winners from among the eight best comprehensive design proposals for apps submitted by companies, individuals, and teams of individuals. Contestants are asked to complete an online submission form by August 12, 2012, detailing their design and how it will improve financial access and/or capability. The MyMoneyAppUp Challenge is open to all U.S. citizens and permanent residents who are 18 years or older. For complete details on Challenge eligibility requirements and rules, visit[MyMOneyAppUp.Challenge.gov](http://mymoneyappup.challenge.gov/).

  

A

grand prize, two runners-up, and two honorable mentions will be selected at an event in Washington, D.C., and will receive cash prizes ranging from $2,500 to $10,000.

  

The Challenge is also accepting short-form ideas from the general public (such as industry leaders, academics, and consumer advocates) via the IdeaBank, where competitors submit app-based solutions, in 140 characters or less, on the Challenge website ([IdeaBank.MyMoneyAppUp.Challenge.gov](http://ideabank.mymoneyappup.challenge.gov/)). IdeaBank submissions will be put to an open crowd-sourced vote and a panel of judges will pick the final winners from the top 10 vote-getters, with winners receiving cash prizes ranging from $250 to $1,000.



Su

pport for prizes and the administration of the Challenge by D2D and CFSI comes from the Ford Foundation, Omidyar Network, and the Citi Foundation. No government funds are being used as part of the MyMoneyAppUp Challenge prizes.

  

At the conclusion of the MyMoneyAppUp Challenge, competitors who want to take their winning ideas to the next step and develop fully functional apps may enter the Financial Capability Development (FinCapDev)[Competition​](http://fincapdev.com/), a separate, complementary competition sponsored exclusively by D2D and CFSI.

  

**About the MyMoneyAppUp Challenge**The MyMoneyAppUp Challenge, launched by Treasury in partnership with the D2D Fund and Center for Financial Services Innovation, is a contest offering cash prizes for the best mobile app ideas and designs to help Americans make smart financial choices, access high quality financial products and services, and control and shape their financial futures.

  

The Challenge is part of Treasury’s efforts to promote Smart Disclosure, a new initiative by the Obama Administration to expand access to data that can fuel the creation of new products and services to benefit financial consumers. Contestants will be encouraged to create ideas and designs for apps that incorporate data to promote financial capability and access.

  

To learn more about the Challenge or to submit your idea, visit[MyMOneyAppUp.Challenge.gov](http://mymoneyappup.challenge.gov/).

    

###



​

​
