---
title: Mary John Miller Confirmed as Under Secretary for Domestic Finance
date: 2012-03-30
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/tg1516
---
*(Archived Content)*

**** **WASHINGTON –** Mary John Miller was confirmed by the United States Senate yesterday to serve as the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Under Secretary for Domestic Finance. As Under Secretary for Domestic Finance, Miller will be responsible for developing and coordinating Treasury’s policies and guidance in the areas of financial institutions, federal debt financing, financial regulation, and capital markets.   

Since February 2010, Miller has served as Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Financial Markets, where she advised the Secretary on broad matters of domestic finance, financial markets, federal, state and local finance, and federal government lending policies.  In this role, she has been responsible for Treasury’s management of the public debt.

  

“For two years, Mary’s steady hand has helped Treasury navigate a critical set of domestic finance issues, earning her deep respect from colleagues inside and outside this building,” said Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner. “Her sound judgment, insight, and expertise will be tremendously helpful to the President and to me in her new, expanded role within the Department. I am pleased that the Senate moved on this important nomination.”

  

Prior to joining Treasury, Miller spent 26 years working for T. Rowe Price Group, Inc., where she was the director of the Fixed Income Division and a member of the firm’s Management Committee.

  

Miller received a B.A. from Cornell University and an M.C.R.P. from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.  Miller also has earned her Chartered Financial Analyst designation. She is married to James D. Miller and has two sons, Thomas M. Miller and James J. Miller.

  

###​
