---
title: Treasury Issues General Licenses to Support Humanitarian Activity and Athletic Exchanges with Iran
date: 2013-09-10
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2159
url: /news/press-releases/jl2159
---
*(Archived Content)*

​​**WASHINGTON** – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury issued two general licenses designed to support longstanding U.S. Government efforts to encourage humanitarian and goodwill activities between the Iranian and American people.  These two licenses, issued by the Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), authorize certain humanitarian related activities by nongovernmental organizations in Iran and athletic exchanges involving Iran and the United States.  

The licenses issued today authorize the provision of health services, disaster relief, wildlife conservation activities, human rights projects in Iran, activities related to sports matches and events, the sponsorship of sports players, coaching, refereeing, and training, in addition to other activities.  This action further demonstrates this Administration’s commitment to reinforcing ties between the Iranian and American people.



Today’s general licenses were issued pursuant to the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. Part 560.  These general licenses provide a standing authorization to those persons who meet the criteria negating the need to submit a license application for activities that fall under the scope of the general licenses.



General License E authorizes the exportation of services and funds transfers by nongovernmental organizations in support of certain not-for-profit humanitarian activities designed to benefit the people of Iran, including activities related to humanitarian projects to meet basic human needs; non-commercial reconstruction projects in response to natural disasters for a period of up to two years; environmental and wildlife conservation projects; and human rights and democracy building projects.



General License F authorizes the importation and exportation of certain services in support of professional and amateur sports activities and exchanges involving the United States and Iran.  OFAC general licenses, such as General Licenses E and F, provide authorization to those persons who meet its criteria; there is no need to submit a license application for activities that fall under the general licenses.

  

*For a link to General License E issued today click here. *



* *



*For a link to General License F issued today click here.*



**



###



​
