---
title: Treasury Designates Burmese Companies and an Individual with Ties to the Directorate of Defense Industries
date: 2013-12-17T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2247
url: /news/press-releases/jl2247
---
*(Archived Content)*​*Second Action Targeting North Korean Military Ties to Burma This Year* **WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated Burmese companies Asia Metal Company Ltd., Soe Min Htike Co. Ltd., and Excellence Mineral Manufacturing Co. Ltd. pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13619, which targets those involved in arms trading between North Korea and Burma.  Treasury also designated Lt. Colonel Kyaw Nyunt Oo, a Burmese military Staff Officer acting on behalf of the Burmese Directorate of Defense Industries (DDI), which was designated pursuant to E.O. 13619 in July 2012.  These actions continue Treasury’s efforts to target those linked to DDI, which has been involved in purchasing military equipment and related materiel from North Korea.   This action specifically targets Lt. Colonel Kyaw Nyunt Oo and the aforementioned entities; it does not generally target the Government of Burma.  In November 2012, the Government of Burma publicly announced its intention to abide by United Nations Security Council Resolution 1874, which prohibits the procurement of military goods and assistance from North Korea.    “The revenues from these continuing military sales directly support North Korea’s illicit activities,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “We will continue to target this activity in Burma, and the region, as we work with our international partners to shut down North Korea’s dangerous and destabilizing weapons proliferation.”     Today’s action follows Treasury’s July 2, 2013 designation of Lt. General Thein Htay, the Chief of DDI, who is involved in the illicit trade of North Korean arms to Burma, and advances U.S. efforts to pressure the military sales relationship between Burma and North Korea.    The international community has repeatedly condemned North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic missile proliferation activity, most recently in UN Security Council resolutions 2087 and 2094.  North Korea’s arms trade provides it with an important source of revenue with which to expand and enhance its proscribed nuclear and ballistic missile programs, which are a threat to international peace and security.     North Korean weapons officials in Burma have operated several cover or front addresses to receive goods from overseas, and as recently as June 2013, Soe Min Htike Co. Ltd. and Excellence Mineral were companies working with North Korean officials to import materiel for military weapons programs.  As of December 2012, Asia Metal constructed buildings and supplied construction materials on a DDI factory compound where approximately 30 North Koreans were still working.   As of February 2013, Soe Min Htike Co. Ltd was a known procurement agent for the Burmese military’s DDI, specializing in importing foreign supplies and equipment for DDI for at least 30 years.    U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in any transactions with the designees listed today, and any assets they may have subject to U.S. jurisdiction are frozen.**Identifying Information**Name:              Asia Metal Company Limited Address:          No. 106 Pan Pe Khaung Maung Khtet Road, Industrial Zone (4), Shwe Pyi Thar Township, Yangon, Burma Alt. Address: No. (40) Yangon-Mandalay Road, Kywe Sekan, Pyay Gyi Tagon Township, Mandalay, Burma Alt. Address:  No. A/B (1-5), Paung Laung (24) St, Ext; Ward (2), Nay Pyi Taw, Pyinmana, Burma Website:          [http://www.amcsteel.com](http://www.amcsteel.com/) Email:              [asiametal@myanmar.com.mm](mailto:asiametal@myanmar.com.mm)   Name:              Soe Min Htike Co. Ltd. A.K.A.:           Soe Ming Htike A.K.A.:           Soe Min Jtiak Co. Ltd. A.K.A.:           Soe Min Htaik Co., Ltd.   Address:          No. 4, 6A Kabaaye Pagoda Road, Mayangon Township, Yangon, Burma Alt. Address:  No. 3, Kan Street, No. 10 Ward, Hlaing Township, Yangon, Burma    Name:              Excellence Mineral Manufacturing Co., Ltd. Address:          Plot No. (142), U Ta Yuoat Gyi Street, Industrial Zone No. (4), Hlaing Thar Yar Township, Yangon, Burma   Name:              Kyaw Nyunt Oo DOB:              June 30, 1959 Rank:               Lieutenant Colonel Title:                Staff Officer (Grade 1), D.D.I.   ###
