---
title: Obama Administration Launches One-Stop-Shop Website to Educate Business Owners About the Affordable Care Act
date: 2013-08-01
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2138
url: /news/press-releases/jl2138
---
*(Archived Content)*

  

**WASHINGTON **– The Obama Administration today launched[Business.USA.gov/healthcare](http://business.usa.gov/healthcare), a one-stop-shop Website which will provide employers of all sizes educational materials on how the Affordable Care Act may affect businesses and help them compete. The site includes a wizard tool that is tailored based on size and location, so businesses can learn how the law helps them provide affordable coverage options to their employees while still meeting their bottom line. The site will act as a user-friendly hub that connects employers to informational content on tax creditsand other provisions of the law from the Small Business Administration, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and the Treasury Department.

   

As part of the Administration’s ongoing dialogue with leaders of our nation’s top businesses, this latest tool will help ensure that employers of all sizes know what the Affordable Care Act means for them, and have the information they need to take advantage of the new benefits and opportunities under the law. The Administration will work with the employer community to ensure the site continues to be a helpful resource for businesses and their employees, including updating the site with additional, timely information.

  

“The Affordable Care Act helps level the playing field for small businesses, expanding their bargaining power and their ability to offer the kind of valuable benefit packages that attract and retain top-quality workers. Small businesses are a cornerstone of our economy and we are committed to working with them to raise awareness and access to the historic tax credits that can help small businesses and employees cover the cost of health care,” said Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew.

  

“As the Affordable Care Act is implemented, it is so important for us to work with the business community and provide employers with the information they need,” said U.S. Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker. “The health care website on Business.USA.gov/healthcare will be a tremendous resource for self-employed Americans and businesses of all sizes to learn what the Affordable Care Act means for them.”

  

“It’s important for small business owners to know the facts about the Affordable Care Act and Business.USA.gov/healthcare delivers resources and need-to-know information through one streamlined tool,” said SBA Administrator Karen Mills. “This Website will prove to be an invaluable resource for small employers to learn how the law is ushering in better options for them and their employees.”

  

“The Affordable Care Act is providing better care and better choices for millions of Americans, and this is another great tool for employers to learn how they can offer health coverage that makes sense for their business and employees, and works for their bottom line,” said HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius.

  

Many parts of the Affordable Care Act, which was signed into law in March, 2010, are already in effect, including new consumer protections, and improvements to health care coverage that ensure consumers get more value for their premium dollars.

  

Additional benefits will take effect in late 2013 and beyond. Starting October 1, 2013, individuals, including those who are self-employed, and small businesses looking for a better plan, will have a new way to shop for private health insurance through the Health Insurance Marketplace and the Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) found at HealthCare.gov.   Individuals may be eligible for lower costs on their monthly premiums and self-employed individuals and small businesses may be eligible for tax credits to help with the costs of coverage.

  

President Obama issued a challenge to government agencies to think beyond their organizational boundaries in the best interest of serving America's business community, and start thinking and acting more like the businesses they serve. He directed the creation of BusinessUSA.gov, a centralized platform to make it easier than ever for businesses to access services to help them grow and hire.  BusinessUSA.gov leverages the resources of our partners across the federal government to ensure that business owners get comprehensive information and easy-to-use tools related to range of topics, including health care. To learn more, please visit Business.USA.gov.

  

###
