---
title: Deputy Secretary Neal S. Wolin Departing Treasury After More Than Four Years of Service
date: 2013-07-23
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2020
url: /news/press-releases/jl2020
---
*(Archived Content)*

  

** WASHINGTON **– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that Deputy Secretary Neal S. Wolin will conclude his tenure at the Department at the end of August, more than four years after he was confirmed to serve by the United States Senate. Treasury had previously announced that Deputy Secretary Wolin had agreed to stay for a period of transition once Secretary Jacob J. Lew was confirmed.

  

President Obama said, “For more than four years, Neal has played a key role on my economic team.  His deep knowledge and excellent judgment helped us prevent a second Great Depression, pass tough new Wall Street reform, strengthen our financial system, foster growth here at home, and promote economic development around the world.  Every day, Neal works to grow our economy and strengthen the middle class, and I’m grateful for his leadership and his commitment to serving the American people.”

  

“I want to thank Neal for his extraordinary service to the Treasury Department and our country,” said Secretary Lew. “He has been a remarkable leader who has taken on some of the most difficult economic and foreign policy challenges we have faced as a nation.  Neal’s wise counsel has been indispensable to me, and because of his tremendous insight and analysis, we are in a far stronger position today to continue the critical work ahead.”

  

Wolin served as Acting Treasury Secretary from mid-January to late-February 2013. He was confirmed as Deputy in May 2009 and is the longest-serving Deputy Secretary in the Department’s history. Prior to that, Wolin was Deputy Assistant to the President and Deputy Counsel to the President for Economic Policy. Wolin served as General Counsel of the Treasury Department from 1999- 2001 and as Deputy General Counsel from 1995-1999.  He previously served as Executive Assistant to the National Security Advisor, Deputy National Security Advisor and Deputy Legal Advisor to the National Security Council.

  

From 2001 to 2008, Wolin served at The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. as President and Chief Operating Officer for Property and Casualty Operations. Earlier in his career, he also worked in private law practice at Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering in Washington, DC.

  

Wolin is a graduate of Yale College, the University of Oxford, and Yale Law School.



**  **



**###​**

​
