---
title: Treasury Announces Marketable Borrowing Estimates
date: 2013-11-04T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2208
url: /news/press-releases/jl2208
---
*(Archived Content)*

**View the Sources and Uses table**[** here**](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/Sources-and-Uses-October-2013.pdf)**. ​ Washington  --** The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced its current estimates of net marketable borrowing for the October – December 2013 and January – March 2014 quarters:

- During the October – December 2013 quarter, Treasury expects to issue $266 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-December cash balance of $140 billion.  This borrowing estimate is $32 billion higher than announced in July 2013.  The increase in borrowing relates primarily to an increase to the end-of-December cash balance assumption[1], offset by lower outlays and higher net issuance of state and local government securities (SLGS) due to the reopening of the SLGS subscription window.

- During the January – March 2014 quarter, Treasury expects to issue $265 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-March cash balance of $45 billion.
 

During the July – September 2013 quarter, Treasury issued $197 billion in net marketable debt and ended the quarter with a cash balance of $88 billion.  In July 2013, Treasury had estimated $209 billion in net marketable debt and assumed an end-of-September cash balance of $95 billion.  The decrease in borrowing was driven by the lower ending cash balance and lower outlays.

Additional financing details relating to Treasury’s Quarterly Refunding will be released at 8:30 a.m. on Wednesday, November 6, 2013.

 

###

[1]

​ Cash Balance Assumptions July - September Quarter October - December Quarter Prior Current Change Prior Current  Change Opening Balance 135 135 0 95 88 -7 Closing Balance 95 88 -7 80 140 60 Impact on Borrowing -40 -46 -7 -15 52 67 ​​
