---
title: Treasury Secretary Lew Visists Siemens Manufacturing Plant, Meets with Local Business Leaders in Atlanta
date: 2013-03-14
draft: false
press_release_number: JL1880
url: /news/press-releases/jl1880
---
*(Archived Content)*

​ **In first trip since taking office, Secretary Lew discussed the importance of growing the economy, creating jobs and strengthening the middle class to increase competitiveness ATLANTA –**Highlighting the importance of investments in manufacturing, innovation and job creation in the United States, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew today toured a Siemens’ manufacturing plant outside Atlanta, Georgia. The GA 400 facility in Alpharetta, one of Siemens’ 130 manufacturing operations throughout the country, develops and manufactures drive components that support major American industries, including the transportation, mining, metal, hybrid commercial vehicle and automobile sectors. Earlier today, the Secretary also met with leaders of Atlanta-area companies, foundations and educational institutions to hear their views on the economy, their economic priorities for the coming months and the challenges they are facing.   During his visit to Atlanta, Secretary Lew discussed the President’s economic priorities to strengthen the middle class and lay a foundation for long-term economic growth, including the need to strengthen manufacturing, modernize infrastructure, and prepare the American work force for the high-tech jobs of the future. These measures will help increase the momentum of the economic recovery and speed the pace of job creation.   “To have a strong and growing middle class, our economy needs companies like Siemens to continue to invest in cutting-edge research, produce innovative products in America for sale around the globe, and create thousands of high-skilled jobs across the country,” said Secretary Lew. “That is why we need to continue to support the competitiveness of American businesses with policies that strengthen our manufacturing base, encourage exports and invest in our workforce.”   Siemens is illustrative of these commitments.  The company operates 130 manufacturing sites in the country, touching each of the 50 states and employing nearly 60,000 workers across the United States.      “Siemens has invested $25 billion in the U.S. over the past 10 years and nearly $1 billion annually in research and development. Here in Alpharetta and across the country, we continue to invest in our people, our facilities and our communities to deliver the most efficient, productive and sustainable technologies for our customers,” said Helmuth Ludwig, CEO of Siemens Industry Sector, North America.“We believe the U.S. is poised to lead the next manufacturing renaissance and we support the Secretary’s mission to highlight and bolster American innovation and manufacturing.”   Siemens’ GA 400 plant in Alpharetta employs 700 workers. It manufactures traction drives for the rail and mining industries, low voltage drives for the water, wastewater, paper and metals industries, and more than 100 different types of control panels. Siemens is also focused on improving the energy efficiency of transportation infrastructure in major cities across the country. The GA 400 plant’s work on the Atlanta Streetcar project is reducing fuel costs and polluting emissions for the city.       ###
