---
title: Treasury Announces Marketable Borrowing Estimates
date: 2013-04-29T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL1919
url: /news/press-releases/jl1919
---
*(Archived Content)*

**  View the Sources and Uses table here​​​**

* *

**WASHINGTON** –The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced its current estimates of net marketable borrowing for the April – June and July – September 2013 quarters:

During the April – June 2013 quarter, Treasury expects to pay down $35 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-June cash balance of $75 billion.  This borrowing estimate is $138 billion lower than announced in February 2013.  The decrease in borrowing relates primarily to higher receipts, lower outlays, and changes in cash balance assumptions. [1]

During the July – September 2013 quarter, Treasury expects to issue $223 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-September cash balance of $80 billion.

During the January – March 2013 quarter, Treasury issued $349 billion in net marketable debt and ended the quarter with a cash balance of $79 billion.  In February 2013, Treasury had estimated $331 billion in net marketable borrowing and assumed an end-of-March cash balance of $30 billion.  The increase in the cash balance [1] was driven primarily by higher receipts and lower outlays.

Additional financing details relating to Treasury’s Quarterly Refunding will be released at 9:00 a.m. on Wednesday, May 1, 2013.

###

[1]​

** Cash Balance Assumptions January - March Quarter April - June Quarter ** Prior

Current

Change

Prior

Current

Change

Opening Balance

$93

$93

$0

$30

$79

$49

Closing Balance

$30

$79

$49

$60

$75

$15

Impact on Borrowing

-$63

-$14

$49

$30

-$4

-$34
