---
title: Treasury Designates Mexican Narcotics Trafficker Tied to Los Zetas
date: 2013-05-14T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL1939
url: /news/press-releases/jl1939
---
*(Archived Content)*

***Action Targets Major Narcotics Trafficker Operating on U.S. Border* WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the designation of Mexican national Alfredo Andrade Parra pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act) for his significant role in international narcotics trafficking and for his links to Los Zetas.  Andrade Parra is a major narcotics trafficker operating along the U.S.-Mexico border.  He is responsible for smuggling multiple-tons of marijuana and cocaine, monthly, from Mexico to the U.S. for Los Zetas leaders Miguel Trevino Morales and Omar Trevino Morales. Andrade Parra’s ability to smuggle large quantities of drugs into the U.S. and receive bulk cash proceeds returned to Mexico make him a key component of the ruthless Los Zetas drug trafficking organization in the region near Ciudad Acuna, Coahuila, Mexico.

“Today’s action follows on the heels of the Mexican Government’s arrest of Andrade Parra in April and targets the drug trafficking and bulk cash smuggling activities of a significant associate of Los Zetas,” said OFAC Director Adam J. Szubin. “OFAC will continue to work with ourforeign counterparts to expose key drug traffickers and deprive them of access to the international financial system.”

Andrade Parra is wanted in the Western District of Texas for multiple counts of drug trafficking and money laundering relating to a March 5, 2008 indictment from the Del Rio Division and a May 22, 2003 indictment from the San Antonio Division. In April 2013, Mexican authorities arrested Andrade Parra.

Today’s action against Andrade Parra generally prohibits U.S. persons from conducting financial or commercial transactions with him, and freezes any assets he may have under U.S. jurisdiction.

The President identified Los Zetas as a significant foreign narcotics trafficker pursuant to the Kingpin Act in April 2009. On July 24, 2011, the President named Los Zetas as a significant Transnational Criminal Organization in the Annex to Executive Order 13581 (Blocking Property of Transnational Criminal Organizations). Additionally, OFAC designated Los Zetas leaders Miguel and Omar Trevino Morales on July 20, 2009 and March 24, 2010, respectively.

Today’s action is part of ongoing efforts to apply financial measures against significant foreign narcotics traffickers and their organizations worldwide. The Treasury Department has designated more than 1,200 individuals and entities pursuant to the Kingpin Act since June 2000. Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties. Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million. Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million. Other individuals face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.

 

*To view a chart of the Andrade Parra organization, click here.*

 

###
