---
title: Treasury Secretary Lew Visits Vitamix Production Facility, Meets with Local Business Leaders in Cleveland
date: 2013-05-07T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL1928
url: /news/press-releases/jl1928
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Secretary Lew to discuss the importance of targeted investments in our economy and sensible deficit-reduction measures that will make the United States a magnet for jobs CLEVELAND**– Highlighting the importance of investing in manufacturing and innovative technologies to increase the momentum of the recovery and speed the pace of job creation, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew today toured a Vitamix production facility outside of Cleveland, Ohio. Vitamix, which designs and manufactures blending equipment for the food service industry and home kitchens, has experienced significant growth in the U.S. and abroad. Company exports have doubled in the last two years, making Vitamix products available in more than 100 countries. Earlier today, the Secretary participated in a roundtable with business and community leaders hosted by NorTech, a local innovation-focused non-profit economic development organization.

What I heard from business owners and manufacturing workers in Ohio today was clear—our top priority as a nation has to be creating jobs and growing the economy, said Secretary Lew. The administration has put forward a powerful jobs and growth plan that will replace the sequester, reduce the deficit and strengthen the recovery. It is time to put that sensible plan in place so that more Americans can get back to work and more businesses can innovate, expand and hire.

Family-owned Vitamix assembles all of its state-of-the-art products in northeast Ohio, employing more than 700 workers, 400 of which support Vitamix's manufacturing operations in Greater Cleveland. The company's current expansion is projected to employ hundreds of more people in the region.

This company became a market leader in blending technology through the hard work and innovation of the people who live and work in this community, said Jodi Berg, President of Vitamix. Northeast Ohio is leading a rebirth in U.S. manufacturing and we're proud to be a part of that.

Later today, Secretary Lew will deliver remarks at the City Club of Cleveland on what the nation's top priority has to be – growing the economy and creating good jobs in the United States. He will discuss how far the country has come, but what more needs to be done – underscoring the ongoing challenge of long-term unemployment and joblessness among young people – and the need for both parties to come together to secure our economic future, make us more competitive and strengthen the middle class. The event will be streamed LIVE at[http://cityclub.org/](http://cityclub.org/)

###
