---
title: Secretary Lew Visits Patton Electronics in Maryland to Highlight Export Opportunities for American Innovators
date: 2013-11-07
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2211
url: /news/press-releases/jl2211
---
*(Archived Content)*

** **



**GAITHERSBURG, MARYLAND –**Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew today toured the production floor of Patton Electronics Company, a family-owned business and exporter of telecommunications equipment in Gaithersburg, Maryland. The visit highlights the significance of U.S. investment in manufacturing and innovative technologies.  The Secretary heard from Patton about the importance of the Administration’s continued efforts to promote American exports and expand opportunities for U.S. workers and businesses.

  

“Patton Electronics is an excellent example of the strength and resilience of the American economy,” said Secretary Lew. “A growing export market has been key to Patton’s ability to expand and create jobs. Theirsuccess demonstrates why it is so critical that we continue to drive innovation, invest in manufacturing, and open up opportunities for U.S. companies.”

  

Patton Electronics Company has been a participant in the Export-Import Bank’s Working Capital Lender Loan Guaranteeprogram since 2000. The company exports its network access and connectivity products to more than 120 countries around the world and cites that sales to international customers contribute to more than 70 percent of its business. Today, Patton employs nearly 100 workers in the Gaithersburg community in manufacturing, engineering, and marketing.

  

###
