---
title: Treasury Designates Al-Qa’ida Supporters in Qatar and Yemen
date: 2013-12-18
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2249
url: /news/press-releases/jl2249
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of Treasury today imposed sanctions on two al-Qa'ida supporters based in Qatar and Yemen.  Abd al-Rahman bin 'Umayr al-Nu'aymi (Nu'aymi) and `Abd al-Wahhab Muhammad `Abd al-Rahman al-Humayqani (Humayqani) were named as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224. Nu'aymi was designated for providing financial support to al-Qa'ida, Asbat al-Ansar, al-Qa'ida in Iraq, and al-Shabaab, and Humayqani was designated for providing financial support to and acting on behalf of al-Qa'ida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP).



It is essential for countries to take proactive steps to disrupt terrorist financing, especially where al-Qa'ida and its affiliates are concerned.  We will continue to work with our partners in the Gulf to ensure that charitable donations are not used to support violence in the region or elsewhere, said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.



Nu'aymi is a Qatar-based terrorist financier and facilitator who has provided money and material support and conveyed communications to al-Qa'ida and its affiliates in Syria, Iraq, Somalia and Yemen for more than a decade.  He was considered among the most prominent Qatar-based supporters of Iraqi Sunni extremists.  Humayqani has used his Yemen-based charity as a cover for funneling financial support to AQAP and has frequently traveled throughout the Arabian Peninsula while conducting business for AQAP.  During political unrest in Yemen, Humayqani reportedly assisted AQAP in gaining a foothold and safe haven in al-Bayda' Governorate, Yemen and as of mid-2011 served as the acting AQAP amir there.  Both Nu'aymi and Humayqani are at the center of global support networks that fund and facilitate terrorism.

  

As a result of today's designation, any assets these individuals may have under U.S. jurisdiction are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from doing business with them.



**'Abd al-Rahman bin 'Umayr al-Nu'aymi**



In 2013**, **Nu'aymi ordered the transfer of nearly $600,000 to al-Qa'ida via al-Qa'ida's representative in Syria, Abu-Khalid al-Suri, and intended to transfer nearly $50,000 more.****



Nu'aymi has facilitated significant financial support to al-Qa'ida in Iraq, and served as an interlocutor between al-Qa'ida in Iraq leaders and Qatar-based donors.  Nu'aymi reportedly oversaw the transfer of over $2 million per month to al-Qa'ida in Iraq for a period of time.  He also served as an interlocutor between these Qatari nationals and al-Qa'ida in Iraq leaders. Between 2003 and 2004, Nu'aymi provided support to the Iraqi insurgency more broadly and served as a conduit for their broadcast materials to media outlets.



Nu'aymi as of mid-2012 provided approximately $250,000 to two U.S.-designated al-Shabaab figures, Mukhtar Robow and Sheikh Hassan Aweys Ali, the latter of whom is also designated by the United Nations (UN).  Also in 2012, Nuaymi provided financial support to a charity headed by Yemen-based Abd al-Wahhab Muhammad 'Abd al-Rahman al-Humayqani, who channeled funding to AQAP.



**`Abd al-Wahhab Muhammad `Abd al-Rahman al-Humayqani**



In his capacity as the head of a Yemen-based charity, Humayqani has used his status in the charitable community to fundraise and has provided some of that funding to AQAP and has facilitated financial transfers from AQAP supporters in Saudi Arabia to Yemen in support of AQAP operations.  As of 2012, Humayqani was an important figure within AQAP and reportedly had a relationship with important AQAP leaders.  Humayqani and others in March 2012 reportedly orchestrated an AQAP attack on a Yemeni Republican Guard base in al-Bayda' Governorate, Yemen. The attack employed multiple vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices and killed seven.  He is suspected to have recruited individuals to AQAP who were involved in a plot to assassinate Yemeni officials.



Humayqani has provided financial support and other services to AQAP and acted for or on behalf of the group.  He has represented AQAP in meetings with Yemeni officials to negotiate the release of Yemeni soldiers held by AQAP and worked with AQAP operatives to coordinate the movement of AQAP fighters within Yemen.  Humayqani has directed a group of armed AQAP associates that intended to carry out attacks on Yemeni government facilities and institutions, including a Yemeni government building in al-Bayda Governorate.   He has also recruited individuals in Sana, Yemen on behalf of AQAP in support of AQAP efforts in southern Yemen.



Along with the U.S. and UN designated cleric Shaykh Abd al-Majid al-Zindani, he has issued religious guidance in support of AQAP operations.  Humayqani and AQAP leadership have planned to establish a new political party in Yemen, which AQAP planned to use as a cover for the recruitment and training of fighters and a means to attract broader support. AQAP leadership decided that Humayani would play a public role as a leader and spokesman for the new political party.



**Identifying Information**



Abd al-Rahman bin Umayr al-Nu'aymiAKA:  Abd al-Rahman bin 'Amir al-Na'imiAKA:  'Abd al-Rahman al-Nu'aimiAKA:  'Abd al-Rahman bin 'Amir al-Nu'imiAKA: 'Abd al-Rahman bin 'Amir al-Nu'aymiAKA:  'Abdallah Muhammad al-Nu'aymiAKA:  'Abd al-Rahman al-Nua'ymiAKA:  A. Rahman al-NaimiAKA:  Abdelrahman Imer al Jaber al NaimehAKA:  A. Rahman Omair J AlnaimiAKA:  Abdulrahman Omair al NeaimiDOB: 1954Passport: 00868774 (Qatar) Expiration Date: April 27, 2014Personal Identification Number: 25463401784 (Qatar)Personal Identification Number Expiration: December 6, 2019



`Abd al-Wahhab Muhammad `Abd al-Rahman al-HumayqaniAKA:  `Abd al-Wahab Muhammad `Abd al-Rahman al-HumayqaniAKA:  `Abd al-Wahab Muhammad `Abd al-Rahman al-HamiqaniAKA:  `Abd al-Wahab Muhammad `Abd al-Rahman al-HamayqaniAKA:  Abdul-Wahab Mohammed Abdul Rahman al-HumaikaniAKA:  'Abdul-Wahab Mohammed Abdul-Rahman al-HumayqaniAKA:  'Abdul-Wahab Mohammed Abdul-Rahman al-HumaiqaniAKA:  'Abdul-Wahab Mohammed Abdul-Rahman al-HamiqaniAKA:  Abdul Wahab al-HumayqaniAKA:  `Abd al-Wahab al-HumayqaniAKA:  `Abd al-Wahab al-HamiqaniAKA:  `Abd al-Wahab al-HamayqaniAKA:  `Abd al-Wahab al-HumiqaniAKA:  Abdulwahhab Mohammed Abdulrahman al-HumaikaniAKA:  `Abd al-Wahab al-Qawi al-HamiqaniAKA:  `Abd al-Wahab al-Qawi al-HumayqaniAKA:  `Abd al-Wahhab Muhammad `Abd al-Rahim al-HumayqaniAKA:  Abu AyedAKA:  Abu AyidDOB:  August 4, 1972POB:  al-Zahir, al-Bayda', YemenPassport: 03902409 (Yemen) Date of Issue: June 13, 2010; Expiration Date: June 13, 2016Passport:  01772281 (Yemen)Personal Identification Number: 1987853 (Yemen)



*###*
