---
title: Treasury Sanctions Taiwan Proliferators Linked to North Korea
date: 2013-05-10
draft: false
press_release_number: JL1935
url: /news/press-releases/jl1935
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated one Taiwan entity and one Taiwan individual pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13382, an authority aimed at freezing the assets of proliferators of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their supporters.  Trans Multi Mechanics Co. Ltd. and Chang Wen-Fu were designated for their links to a North Korean procurement agent, Alex H.T. Tsai.  Alex Tsai and his son, Yueh-Hsun Tsai, were recently arrested in Estonia and the United States, respectively, and each was charged in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, pursuant to criminal complaints unsealed on May 1, 2013, with conspiring to defraud the United States in its enforcement of laws and regulations prohibiting the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

“It is essential that we continue to make it as difficult as possible for North Korea to facilitate its nuclear and ballistic missile programs by exposing key cogs in North Korea’s procurement network,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “We will continue to work with our partners in Federal law enforcement and our friends around the world to expose anyone assisting the North Korean government’s illicit procurement activities.”

Alex Tsai was designated by the Treasury Department on January 16, 2009 for providing support to North Korea’s premier arms dealer, Korea Mining Development Trading Corporation (KOMID), which was listed in the Annex to E.O. 13382 and designated at the United Nations in April 2009.  Tsai’s wife, Lu-chi Su, and two companies Tsai controlled, Global Interface Company and Trans Merits Co. Ltd. were also designated by Treasury in January 2009.

Chang Wen-Fu has been identified as the CEO and general manager of Trans Multi Mechanics Co. Ltd. and has been actively involved in the procurement of dual-use machinery for North Korea.  Alex Tsai has used Trans Multi Mechanics Co. Ltd. to procure and ship hundreds of thousands of dollars’ worth of equipment to North Korea and to negotiate contracts on behalf of North Korean parties.

Trans Multi Mechanics Co. Ltd. was further alleged to have been involved in some of the purchases which resulted in the charges against Alex Tsai and his son.  Based on the Tsai family’s support for KOMID, these actions are consistent with U.S. implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 2094, which requires Member States to sanction any individual or entity acting for or on behalf of a UN-designated individual or entity.

U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in any transactions with the entities listed today, and any assets those entities may have subject to U.S. jurisdiction are frozen.

 

**Identifying information: Name: Trans Multi Mechanics Co. Ltd.**

AKA:  Feng Sheng Co., Ltd.

Location:  19, Chin Ho Lane, Chung Cheng Rd., Taya District, Taichung City, Taiwan

Alt. Location:  No 19, Jinhe Lane, Zhongzheng Road, Daya District, Taichung City, Taiwan

 

**Name:  Chang Wen-Fu** AKA:  Tony Chang

AKA:  Zhang Wen-Fu

DOB:  April 01, 1965

Nationality/Passport Issuing Authority:  Taiwan

Passport Number:  211606395 (Taiwan)

 

###

​
