---
title: Treasury Departmeny Announces $57.4 Million in Proceeds from Pricing of Auctions of Preferred Stock and Subordinated Debt of Eight Financial Institutions
date: 2013-07-12
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2009
url: /news/press-releases/jl2009
---
*(Archived Content)*
Auctions Part of Treasury’s Continued Efforts to Wind Down TARP’s Bank Programs 
Proceeds Deliver Additional Profit for Taxpayers on TARP’s Bank Programs
WASHINGTON – As part of the strategy it outlined for winding down its remaining Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) bank investments, the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced that it priced auctions of preferred stock and subordinated debt (the “CPP Securities”) in the following eight institutions at the following prices:

Issuer and Security

Price per share* or per $1,000 aggregate principal amount

Number of shares or aggregate principal amount

			to be sold

Aggregate Gross Proceeds

Alarion Financial Services, Inc., Ocala, FL

 

 

 

Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series A

$982.90

6,514

$6,402,610.60

Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series B

$1,045.31

326

$340,771.06

 

 

 

$6,743,381.66

ColoEast Bankshares, Inc., Lamar, CO

 

 

 

Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series One

$903.75

10,000

$9,037,500.00

Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series Two

$9,987.50

50

$499,375.00

 

 

 

$9,536,875.00

Commonwealth Business Bank, Los Angeles, CA

 

 

 

Fixed Rate Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series A

$951.00

7,701

$7,323,651.00

Fixed Rate Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series B

$950.88

385

$366,088.80

 

 

 

$7,689,739.80

Crosstown Holding Company, Blaine, MN

 

 

 

Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series A

$982.27

10,650

$10,461,175.50

Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series B

$1,006.71

533

$536,576.43

 

 

 

$10,997,751.93

Fidelity Federal Bancorp, Evansville, IN

 

 

 

Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series A

$1,058.90

6,657

$7,049,097.30

Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series B

$1,223.75

200

$244,750.00

 

 

 

$7,293,847.30

Mountain Valley Bancshares, Inc., Cleveland, GA

 

 

 

Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series A

$990.00

3,300

$3,267,000.00

Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series B

$1,000.21

165

$165,034.65

 

 

 

$3,432,034.65

Omega Capital Corp., Lakewood, CO

 

 

 

Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series A

$1,142.90

2,816

$3,218,406.40

Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series B

$1,311.25

141

$184,886.25

 

 

 

$3,403,292.65

Premier Financial Corp., Dubuque, IA

 

 

 

7.7% Senior Subordinated Security due 2039

$1,237.42

$6,349,000.00

$7,856,379.58

13.8% Senior Subordinated Security due 2039

$1,525.00

$317,000.00

$483,425.00

 

 

 

$8,339,804.58

 
 
 
 
 

*Reflects a liquidation preference of $1,000 per share, except for the ColoEast Bankshares, Inc. Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series Two, which reflects a liquidation preference of $10,000 per share.
 
The aggregate gross proceeds to Treasury from the auctions are expected to be approximately $57.4 million.
 
“By any measure the TARP bank programs have been a success, and this latest round of auctions has put taxpayers one step closer to fully winding down a program that has now collected nearly $26 billion more than what was initially invested,” said Assistant Secretary for Financial Stability Timothy G. Massad.  “Our economy is in a stronger position because of our efforts, and we will continue to wind down the remaining CPP investments in a way that helps support community banks and protects taxpayer interests.”
TARP’s bank programs have already earned a significant profit for taxpayers. Including the expected proceeds from the transactions announced today, Treasury has now recovered nearly $271 billion from TARP’s bank programs through repayments, dividends, interest, and other income – compared to the $245 billion initially invested.  Approximately $2 billion of the repayments were refinanced under the Small Business Lending Fund (SBLF). Congress created the SBLF outside of TARP and required Treasury to let CPP institutions repay TARP funds by borrowing under that program.  Each additional dollar recovered from TARP’s bank programs is an additional dollar of profit for taxpayers.
The vast majority of the nearly $271 billion in funds recovered to date are from repayments at par, as well as dividends, interest, and sales of warrants. Proceeds from CPP preferred stock auctions comprise less than one percent (approximately $3 billion) of that overall total (nearly $271 billion).
These auctions are part of the strategy that Treasury outlined in May 2012 for winding down its remaining TARP bank investments in a way that protects taxpayer interests and preserves the strength of our nation’s community banks. Treasury indicated that it intends to use a combination of repayments, restructurings, and sales to manage and recover those remaining investments.
The closings for the auctions are expected to occur on or about July 22, 2013, subject to customary closing conditions.  The offerings were priced through modified Dutch auctions. 
 
The CPP Securities sold in the auction have not been and will not be registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the Act), and may not be offered or sold in the United States or to, or for the benefit of, U.S. persons absent registration under, or an applicable exemption from, the registration requirements of the Act and applicable state securities law.  The CPP Securities were offered only to (1) domestic “qualified institutional buyers” as defined in Rule 144A under the Act, (2) certain domestic institutional “accredited investors” as defined in Rule 501(a) under the Act that have total assets of not less than $25,000,000 and (3) in certain cases, certain directors and executive officers of the respective issuers of the CPP Securities.  This press release does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy the CPP Securities, and shall not constitute an offer, solicitation or sale in any jurisdiction in which, or to any persons to whom, such offering, solicitation or sale would be unlawful. 
 
For more details on Treasury’s lifetime cost estimates for TARP programs, please visit Treasury’s Monthly 105(a) Report to Congress on TARP at this [link](http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/financial-stability/briefing-room/reports/105/Pages/default.aspx).
###
