---
title: Treasury Designates Burmese LT. General Thein Htay, Chief of Directorate of Defense Industries
date: 2013-07-02
draft: false
press_release_number: JL1998
url: /news/press-releases/jl1998
---
*(Archived Content)*

*Action Targets North Korean Military Sales to Burma*



**WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury designated Lt. General Thein Htay, the head of Burma's Directorate of Defense Industries (DDI), pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13619, which targets those involved in arms trading between North Korea and Burma.  This action specifically targets Thein Htay, who is involved in the illicit trade of North Korean arms to Burma; it does not target the Government of Burma, which has continued to take positive steps in severing its military ties with North Korea.  In November 2012, the Government of Burma publicly announced its intention to abide by United Nations Security Council Resolution 1874, which prohibits the procurement of military goods and assistance from North Korea.



Thein Htay has disregarded international requirements to stop purchasing military goods from North Korea, the revenues from which directly support North Korea's illicit activities, said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  We will continue our efforts, alongside our international partners, to shut down North Korea's dangerous and destabilizing weapons proliferation.



Thein Htay was designated pursuant to E.O. 13619 for his role in the supply of arms from North Korea to Burma and for acting for or on behalf of DDI.  DDI was designated pursuant to E.O. 13619 in July 2012 for purchasing military equipment and material from North Korea.



The international community has repeatedly condemned North Korea's nuclear and ballistic missile proliferation activity, most recently in UN Security Council Resolutions 2087 and 2094.  North Korea's arms trade provides it with an important source of revenue to expand and enhance its proscribed nuclear and missile programs, which are a threat to international peace and security.



U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in any transactions with the individual listed today, and any assets he may have subject to U.S. jurisdiction are frozen.



**Identifying Information**



Name:              Thein HtayDOB:              September 7, 1955POB:               Taunggyi, BurmaRank:               Lieutenant GeneralTitle:                Chief of Defence IndustriesAlt. Title:         Chief of Army Ordnance Industries



###
