---
title: Treasury Completes Auction to Sell Warrant Positions
date: 2013-06-06
draft: false
press_release_number: JL1972
url: /news/press-releases/jl1972
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** -- The U.S. Department of the Treasury announced today that it completed an auction to sell in private transactions its warrant positions in the 16 financial institutions listed below.  The auction was used to determine the clearing price for each warrant.**Financial Institution Gross Proceeds Underlying Shares**Banner Corporation $134,201.00 243,998.43   Carolina Trust Bank $19,132.00 86,957.00   Central Pacific Financial Corp. $751,888.00  79,288.00   Colony Bankcorp, Inc. $810,000.00 500,000.00   Community West Bancshares $698,351.00 521,158.00   Flagstar Bancorp, Inc. $12,905.00 645,137.90   Heritage Commerce Corp $140,000.00 462,963.00   International Bancshares Corporation $4,018,511.00 1,326,238.00   Mainsource Financial Group, Inc. $1,512,177.00 571,906.00   Metrocorp Bancshares, Inc. $2,087,368.00 771,429.00   Old Second Bancorp, Inc. $106,891.00 815,339.00   Parke Bancorp, Inc. $1,650,288.00 438,906.44   S&T Bancorp, Inc. $527,361.00 517,012.00   Timberland Bancorp, Inc. $1,301,856.00 370,899.00   United Community Banks, Inc. $6,677.00 219,908.40   Yadkin Financial Corporation $55,677.00 91,178.00   Yadkin Financial Corporation $20,000.00 128,663.33             These institutions have either repaid Treasury’s preferred stock or Treasury has already sold its investment in these financial institutions.  The aggregate net proceeds to Treasury from these transactions are expected to be approximately $13,353,283.00.  These proceeds provide an additional return to the American taxpayer from Treasury’s investment in these financial institutions beyond the repayment or sale proceeds and dividend payments it received on the related preferred stocks.  The closings are expected to occur on or about June 12, 2013, subject to customary closing conditions.   “TARP helped prevent our economy from falling into a second Great Depression,” said Assistant Secretary for Financial Stability Timothy G. Massad. “Through repayments and these auctions we have now collected nearly $26 billion more than what was invested in the nation's banks.”   The auctions are part of the overall strategy that Treasury outlined for winding down its remaining TARP bank investments in a way that protects taxpayer interests, promotes financial stability, and preserves the strength of our nation’s community banks. Treasury indicated that it intends to use a combination of repayments, restructurings, and sales to manage and recover those remaining investments.   Taxpayers have recovered $271 billion to date from TARP’s bank programs through repayments, dividends, interest, and other income – compared to the $245 billion initially invested.  Approximately $2 billion of the repayments were refinanced under the Small Business Lending Fund (SBLF). Congress created the SBLF outside of TARP and required Treasury to let CPP institutions repay TARP funds by borrowing under that program. Treasury has remaining outstanding CPP investments in 150  institutions. For more details on Treasury’s lifetime cost estimates for TARP programs, please visit Treasury’s Monthly 105(a) Report to Congress on TARP [here](http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/financial-stability/reports/Documents/April-2013-Monthly-Report-to-Congress.pdf).   The warrants sold in the auctions have not been, and will not be, registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the Act), and may not be offered or sold in the United States or to, or for the benefit of, U.S. persons absent registration under, or an applicable exemption from, the registration requirements of the Act and applicable state securities law.  The warrants will be offered only to (1) “qualified institutional buyers” as defined in Rule 144A under the Act, (2) certain institutional “accredited investors” as defined in Rule 501(a) under the Act that have total assets of not less than $25,000,000 and (3) in certain cases, certain directors and executive officers of the respective issuers of the warrants.  This press release does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy the warrants or any other securities (including the underlying shares of common stock), and shall not constitute an offer, solicitation or sale in any jurisdiction in which, or to any persons to whom, such offering, solicitation or sale would be unlawful.    ###
