---
title: Treasury Targets Spanish Cell of Guberek Money Laundering Network
date: 2013-10-29
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2193
url: /news/press-releases/jl2193
---
*(Archived Content)*

*Treasury Designates 7 Individuals and Entities Linked to the Group’s Global Operations*

* *

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the designation of Spanish-Peruvian dual national Luis Santiago Calle Quiros and his wife, Spanish national Maria Paloma Rodriguez Badillo, as well as five entities in Spain and Peru, as Specially Designated Narcotics Traffickers (SDNTs).  These individuals and entities comprise a Spain-based money laundering cell that moves illicit narcotics proceeds from Europe to Colombia and operates under the direction of Colombian money launderer Isaac Perez Guberek Ravinovicz.

 

Today’s action, taken pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act), generally prohibits U.S. persons from conducting financial or commercial transactions with these entities and individuals, and freezes any assets they may have under U.S. control or jurisdiction.

 

“Narcotics traffickers in the Americas continue to expand outside their traditional markets and are increasingly active in places like Europe,” said Adam Szubin, Director of Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control.  “In recent years, European countries, including Spain, have stepped up efforts to tackle the problem of narcotics trafficking as well as the crimes and violence that accompany it.  Today’s action supports these efforts by exposing a major node in the Guberek money laundering network, which provides a significant pipeline for illicit narcotics proceeds to flow from Europe back to Colombia. ”

 

Luis Santiago Calle Quiros and Maria Paloma Rodriguez Badillo are longtime partners of Colombian money launderer Isaac Perez Guberek Ravinovicz, who, along with his son, Henry Guberek Grimberg, and his secretary, Johanna Patricia Ceballos Bueno, were designated under the Kingpin Act by OFAC on July 9, 2013.  In coordination with Guberek Ravinovicz, Calle Quiros and Rodriguez Badillo would collect cash proceeds from narcotics sales at their offices in Madrid, Spain, and then funnel the money back to accounts controlled by Guberek Ravinovicz, who used these funds to pay narcotics traffickers in Colombia.

 

Guberek Ravinovicz leads a money laundering network based in Bogota, Colombia that launders narcotics proceeds on behalf of numerous drug trafficking organizations in Latin America and the Middle East.  Narcotics traffickers such as Lebanese-Colombian national Ayman Saied Joumaa, previously designated by OFAC on January 26, 2011, and Colombian national Jose Evaristo Linares Castillo, designated on February 20, 2013 and later extradited to the United States on drug trafficking charges, are known to have laundered their drug proceeds through the Guberek money laundering network.

 

Five entities – two in Madrid, Spain, and three in Lima, Peru – were also designated today because they are owned or controlled by Luis Santiago Calle Quiros.

 

Today’s action would not have been possible without the support of the Drug Enforcement Administration.

 

Internationally, OFAC has designated more than 1,300 individuals and entities linked to 103 drug kingpins since June 2000.  Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties.  Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million.  Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million.  Other individuals face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.

 

For a chart relating to today’s actions click[here](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/20131029_guberek_spain.pdf)*.*

 

###
