---
title: Treasury Announces Dr. Elaine Buckberg As New Point Of Contact For Tribal Consultation
date: 2013-04-18T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL1900
url: /news/press-releases/jl1900
---
*(Archived Content)*

The Treasury Department is pleased to announce that Dr. Elaine Buckberg is the new Treasury Point of Contact for Tribal Consultation.  Dr. Buckberg was recently appointed Deputy Assistant Secretary for Policy Coordination, in the Treasury's Office of Economic Policy.  She will be responsible for a broad range of issues and has already begun to meet with Federal government officials who work on matters of concern to Indian Country.  She looks forward to meeting with tribal leaders, to learn more about their interests and concerns, as the year unfolds.

Dr. Buckberg brings to her new position a strong background in financial economics, macroeconomics, and international finance.  She has previously consulted with sovereign nations on economic policy, having begun her professional career at the International Monetary Fund.  At the Fund her responsibilities spanned a range of countries including the Federated States of Micronesia, Russia, Canada, and Mongolia.   Before coming to the Treasury Department, Dr. Buckberg was a Senior Vice President at NERA Economic Consulting, where she worked on financial litigation and regulatory matters.  She has also served as a Vice President at Morgan Stanley, where she specialized in currency strategy, regulatory policy, and market risk.  Dr. Buckberg has published research on a variety of topics including growing wage differentials in the United States, globalization, and emerging market equity pricing.

Dr. Buckberg holds a Ph.D. in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, with concentrations in macroeconomics and international finance.  Her studies at MIT were supported by a National Science Foundation fellowship.  She holds a B.A. degree in economics and English,*magna cum laude*, from Yale University.
