---
title: 'Treasury Designates Senior Al-Qa''ida Bomb Maker'
date: 2013-06-06T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL1973
url: /news/press-releases/jl1973
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury designated a key improvised explosive device (IED) facilitator, ‘Abd-al-Hamid al-Masli, for acting for or on behalf of al-Qa’ida (AQ).  Today’s designation is the latest in a series of Treasury designations targeting terrorist IED facilitators tied to AQ, the Taliban, and Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan (TTP) and their financial networks under Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, which targets terrorists and their supporters.   “Al-Qa’ida continues to employ IEDs as the weapon of choice to kill and maim U.S. and Coalition Forces as well as countless civilians.  The U.S. is determined to disrupt and dismantle these IED networks through all means available, including targeted sanctions,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.    IEDs continue to be the most significant threat to Coalition Forces and Afghan troops in Afghanistan.  In 2012, there were more than 16,000 IED attacks in Afghanistan, and the nearly 4,000 IED attacks so far this year have caused 65 percent of U.S. combat casualties.  Al-Masli was designated today pursuant to E.O. 13224.  He is the leader of an AQ electronics and explosives workshop in Pakistan, which is responsible for producing IED components for AQ senior leadership.  From 2011 through 2012, al-Masli’s workshop provided AQ paramilitary brigades in Afghanistan with timers, circuits, mines, and remote control devices for use in IEDs.  Al-Masli has also instructed AQ recruits on how to build detonators and, as of 2009, was personally in charge of IED component construction at the AQ electronics workshop.  Al-Masli has performed other duties for AQ in addition to his IED facilitation activities. As of mid-2011, al-Masli was part of AQ’s military committee and temporarily led the committee in 2010.    Today’s action builds upon the Treasury Department’s strategy to target and disrupt IED production and facilitation networks in both Afghanistan and Pakistan, where more than 30,000 Pakistanis have been killed by IED attacks over the past decade.  In March 2012, Treasury designated Abdul Samad Achekzai who, in 2011, was deploying suicide bombers to Afghanistan to conduct attacks on Coalition Forces and Afghan authorities.   In October 2012, Treasury designated Maulawi Adam Khan Achekzai, a one-time deputy of Abdul Samad Achekzai and Taliban military commander who, as of 2012, was responsible for the production of IEDs and training of IED makers in support of the Taliban.  That same month, Treasury also designated Aamir Ali Chaudhry, a TTP operative responsible for TTP's electronic needs with regard to producing landmines and IEDs.  In July 2010, Treasury designated Gul Agha Ishakzai, the head of the Taliban's financial commission who has collected funding for suicide attacks in Kandahar, Afghanistan.   Al- Qa’ida was listed as a specially designated global terrorist in in September 2001 when the U.S. government’s executive authority to designate terrorists was created. As a result of today’s action, any property in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons in which ‘Abd-al-Hamid al-Masli has an interest is blocked, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with him.** Identifying Information:**   Name: ‘ABD-AL-HAMID AL-MASLI AKA: ‘Abd-al-Hamid Musalli AKA: ‘Abd al-Hamid Muhammad ‘Abd al-Hamid al-Masli AKA: Hamid Masli AKA: Hamza al-Darnawi AKA: Hamzah al-Darnawi AKA: Hamza Darnawi AKA: Hamzah Darnawi AKA: Hamzah Dirnawi AKA: Hamza Darnavi AKA: Hamza al-Darnavi AKA: Abdullah Darnawi AKA: Abu-Hamzah al-Darnawi DOB: 1976 POB: Darnah, Libya Alt. POB: Danar, Libya Nationality: Libyan Location: Waziristan (Pakistan’s Federally Administered Tribal Areas)   *###*
