---
title: Announcement of Treasury Sanctions Against Aung Thaung
date: 2014-10-31T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2680
url: /news/press-releases/JL2680
---
*(Archived Content)*

* *

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated Aung Thaung, a senior official of the Burmese Government, pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13448.  This action specifically designates an individual, Aung Thaung, and does not designate any Burmese government entity.   As the United States continues to support and monitor Burma’s reforms, including democratic reform and the national peace process, we remain concerned that certain individuals have been working to counter these efforts.

E.O. 13448 authorizes the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to designate, among others, senior officials of the Government of Burma, those who have participated in human rights abuses related to political repression in Burma, and those who have engaged in activities facilitating public corruption.

“By intentionally undermining the positive political and economic transition in Burma, Aung Thaung is perpetuating violence, oppression, and corruption,” said Adam J. Szubin, the Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control.  “The United States firmly supports the Burmese Government’s progress on reforms, and we remain vigilant about targeting those whose activities facilitate repression and dictatorship.”

Aung Thaung is actively attempting to undermine recent economic and political reforms in Burma and has been implicated in previous attacks on Burma’s democratic opposition.  Today’s action will freeze any assets held by Aung Thaung that are within the United States or the possession or control of U.S. persons, and generally prohibits U.S. persons from transacting or doing business with him.

 

**Identifying Information** Name:AungThaungAddress:          No. 1099, PuBa Thiri Township, Ottara (South) Ward, Nay Pyi Taw, BurmaDOB:              01 Dec 1940POB:               Kyauk Kaw Village, Thaung Tha Township, BurmaGender:           MaleNational ID No: 13/KaLaNa (Naing) 011849 (Burma)Title:                Lower House Member of Parliament

###​
