---
title: Treasury Targets Those Engaged In Violence And Atrocities In South Sudan
date: 2014-05-06T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2386
url: /news/press-releases/jl2386
---
*(Archived Content)*​ *Actions Target an Individual Aligned with South Sudan’s Anti-Government Forces* *and a South Sudanese Government Commander*   **WASHINGTON** – Today the U.S. Department of the Treasury sanctioned two individuals pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13664 for being responsible for or complicit in, or having engaged in actions or policies that threaten the peace, security, or stability of South Sudan.  The President signed E.O. 13664 on April 3, 2014, to help put an end to the cycle of violence that has claimed thousands of lives in South Sudan since December 2013.  This authority targets those who threaten the peace, security, or stability of South Sudan, obstruct the peace process, target U.N. peacekeepers, or are responsible for human rights abuses and atrocities.   “The violence and human rights abuses perpetrated by the Government of South Sudan and Riek Machar’s opposition forces must end,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “We now have new tools to crack down on those who obstruct the peace process and hold accountable those responsible for violence against civilians.  We stand with the people of South Sudan who are calling for peace.”**Marial Chanuong** Marial Chanuong is the commander of the South Sudanese Government’s Presidential Guard, which led the operations in Juba following fighting that began December 15, 2013.  Chanuong executed orders to disarm Nuer soldiers and then ordered the use of tanks to target political figures in Juba, killing 22 unarmed bodyguards of Riek Machar and 7 bodyguards of Gier Chuang Aluong.    In the initial operations in Juba, by numerous and credible accounts, Chanuong’s Presidential Guard led the slaughter of Nuer civilians in and around Juba, many who were buried in mass graves.  One such grave was purported to contain 200-300 civilians.**Peter Gadet** Forces led by Gadet attacked and captured Kaka, Upper Nile State from the SPLA in late March 2014.  Subsequently, Gadet led anti-government forces attacks in Unity State during the past few days.  Gadet’s forces were responsible for damaging a partially constructed oil refinery in Unity State being built by a Russian firm.  Gadet’s forces had also taken control of the Tor Abyad and Kilo 30 areas in Unity State’s oil fields. Gadet and Riek Machar Teny appear to be working together to ensure the success of anti-government forces.   Gadet had been transferred from Jonglei State to Bentiu to assist the anti-government forces’ efforts to mobilize the predominantly Bol Nuer population.  As of mid-April, 50,000 anti-government forces troops had surrounded Malakal in preparation for an assault on Bentiu. Forces led by Gadet indiscriminately attacked civilians, including women, in April 2014.    It is believed Gadet will refuse to abide by any future peace agreements made between anti-government forces and the Government of South Sudan, as he would construe it as surrender vice winning the war.**Identifying Information:**   Name:              MARIAL CHANUONG YOL MANGOK AKA:              Marial Chinuong AKA:              Marial Chan AKA:              Marial Chanoung Yol AKA:              Marial Chinoum DOB:              January 1, 1960 POB:               Yirol, Lakes State Passport:          R00005943, South Sudan Title:                Sudan People’s Liberation Army Major General Alt. Title:         Commander, Presidential Guard Unit     Name:              PETER GADET AKA:              Peter Gatdet Yaka AKA:              Peter Gadet Yak AKA:              Peter Gadet Yaak AKA:              Peter Gatdet Yaak AKA:              Peter Gatdet AKA:              Peter Gatdeet Yaka DOB:              1957 - 1959 POB:               Mayom County Unity State Alt. POB:        Mayan, Unity State Title:                General Alt. Title:         Major General         ###
