---
title: Taxpayers Recover $245.5 Million from Second Ally Trading Plan
date: 2014-10-17T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2668
url: /news/press-releases/jl2668
---
*(Archived Content)*​*Total Return on Ally Investment approximately $1.1 billion*    **WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the completion of its second pre-defined written trading plan for Ally Financial Inc. (“Ally”) common stock.  Treasury sold 11,249,044 shares and recovered approximately $245.5 million for taxpayers.  With the conclusion of the second trading plan, Treasury now holds approximately 54.9 million shares of common stock, or approximately 11.4 percent, of Ally.   The conclusion of Treasury’s second trading plan is another step towards successfully exiting the taxpayer’s investment in Ally and winding down the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP).  Taxpayers have now recovered approximately $18.3 billion on the Ally investment, roughly $1.1 billion more than the original $17.2 billion investment.   To date, taxpayers have recovered a total of $440.3 billion on TARP investments including the sale of Treasury’s AIG shares, compared to $425.5 billion disbursed.  For more details on Treasury’s lifetime cost estimates for TARP programs, please visit Treasury’s Monthly 105(a) Report to Congress on TARP at this [link](http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/financial-stability/reports/Pages/Monthly-Report-to-Congress.aspx).   This press release shall not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy any shares of Ally common stock.   ###
