---
title: Treasury Targets Networks Linked to Iran
date: 2014-08-29T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2618
url: /news/press-releases/jl2618
---
*(Archived Content)*

 
  WASHINGTON – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced actions targeting a diverse set of entities and individuals under various Iran-related authorities, targeting Iran’s missile and nuclear programs, sanctions evasion efforts, and support for terrorism.  The Department of State also announced additional actions under its authorities.    These actions reflect the United States’ sustained commitment to enforce our sanctions as the P5+1 and Iran work toward a comprehensive solution to address the international community’s concerns over Iran’s nuclear program.  More specifically:   • Treasury designated four individuals and two entities pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13382, which targets proliferators of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their supporters.  Treasury also identified two aliases used by a previously sanctioned key Iranian missile proliferator.   • Treasury designated two entities and three individuals tied to Iran’s energy industry pursuant to E.O. 13645.  Treasury also identified six vessels pursuant to this authority.         • Treasury designated one entity pursuant to E.O. 13622 for its provision of material support to the Central Bank of Iran in connection with the purchase or acquisition of U.S. dollar bank notes by the Government of Iran.   • Treasury identified five Iranian banks that are subject to sanctions under E.O. 13599, which blocks the property and interests in property of the Government of Iran and Iranian financial institutions.    • Treasury designated four entities and one individual pursuant to E.O. 13224 in connection with Iran’s support for terrorism.  Treasury also identified one alias used by an Iranian airline that was previously sanctioned under this E.O.   “Treasury’s action against over 25 entities and individuals – who are involved in expanding Iran’s proliferation program, supporting terrorism in the region, and helping Iran evade U.S. and international sanctions – reflects our continuing determination to take action against anyone, anywhere, who violates our sanctions,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “During this JPOA extension period, as we fulfill our commitment to provide targeted sanctions relief, we remain committed to enforcing existing sanctions against Iran.”   As a result of today’s action, U.S. persons are now generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with the designated parties listed below and all property and interests in property under U.S. jurisdiction in which the designees below have an interest in are blocked.  In addition, foreign persons that are found to be facilitating deceptive transactions for any persons subject to Iran-related sanctions, such as those listed today, could themselves be exposed to sanctions under E.O. 13608.   WMD-Related Actions under E.O. 13382   Mohammad Javad Imanirad and Arman Imanirad   Mohammad Javad Imanirad and Arman Imanirad are being designated for acting for or on behalf of designated Iranian company, Aluminat.  Aluminat, which was designated in May 2013 under E.O. 13382, is an Iranian entity involved in the procurement of aluminum products for Iran’s nuclear program.  For several years, Aluminat has provided centrifuge components to Kalaye Electric Company and the Iran Centrifuge Technology Company (TESA), which were designated under E.O. 13382 in February 2007 and November 2011, respectively.    Mohammad Javad Imanirad is the Managing Director and founder of Aluminat.  Arman Imanirad represents Aluminat in placing orders from foreign suppliers for aluminum.  He also facilitates financial transfers related to procurement, often in U.S. dollars, on behalf of Aluminat.   Nefertiti Shipping    Nefertiti Shipping is being designated for its ties to the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines (IRISL), which was designated in September 2008 for providing logistical services to Iran’s Ministry of Defense and Armed Forces Logistics (MODAFL).  Nefertiti Shipping is IRISL’s agent in Egypt.  In this capacity, Nefertiti Shipping provides services to the National Iranian Tanker Company (NITC) and NITC-operated oil tankers transiting the Suez Canal that are known to carry crude oil to Syria.  Nefertiti Shipping assisted NITC in obtaining a favorable exchange rate for transfers either to Nefertiti Shipping’s UAE dirham-denominated account or its euro or U.S. dollar-denominated accounts.  NITC was identified as being part of the Government of Iran in July 2012.   Sazeh Morakab, Ali Gholami, Marzieh Bozorg, and New Aliases of Shahid Hemmat Industrial Group   Sazeh Morakab is being designated for providing services to Shahid Hemat Industrial Group (SHIG) and Iran's Aircraft Manufacturing Industrial Company (HESA).  Sazeh Morakab’s Managing Director, Ali Gholami, and Commercial Manager, Marzieh Bozorg, are also being designated today for acting for or on behalf of Sazeh Morakab.  As of late 2012, Sazeh Morakab held established contracts with HESA and procured composite materials on HESA's behalf.  Sazeh Morakab has also helped procure carbon fiber for SHIG.   SHIG was included in the Annex to E.O. 13382 and is tied to Iran's ballistic missile research, development and production activities.  HESA was designated in September 2008 pursuant to E.O. 13382, and conducts research on the production of, development of, and flight operations for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).    SHIG continues to use cover companies to obscure its procurement-related activities including its recent acquisition of metal alloys and controllers.  Treasury today is identifying Sahand Aluminum Parts Industrial Company (SAPICO) and Ardalan Machineries Company (ARMACO) as two aliases used by this key Iranian missile proliferator.                                            Energy-Related Designations under E.O. 13645    Faylaca Petroleum, Abdelhak Kaddouri, Muzzafer Polat, and  Seyedeh Hanieh Seyed Nasser Mohammad Seyyedi   Faylaca Petroleum makes payments on behalf of the Iranian government’s National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC).  Faylaca Petroleum and other Sima General Trading-associated front companies, known to have worked with Iran to market crude oil and petroleum products, have also collaborated to obscure the origin of Iranian gas condensate.  Treasury identified NIOC, which was centrally involved in the sale of Iranian oil, as being part of the Government of Iran in 2008.  Sima General Trading is an Iranian government front company, which was identified as being part of the Government of Iran in 2013 and tied to the NIOC subsidiary, Naftiran Intertrade Company (NICO) Sarl.   Abdelhak Kaddouri is the financial chief of U.S.-sanctioned NICO Sarl and owner and manager of U.S.-sanctioned Swiss Management Services Sarl.  Kaddouri also manages Iranian front companies on behalf of NICO.  NICO is a subsidiary of NIOC and was identified by the Treasury Department as being part of the Government of Iran in 2008.  Swiss Management Services Sarl was identified by Treasury in September 2013 pursuant to E.O. 13599 for acting for or on behalf of the Government of Iran.   Muzzafer Polat is the founder, director general, and manager of Petro Royal FZE.  In 2013, the Treasury Department identified Petro Royal FZE as an entity controlled by Seyed Seyyedi, who was identified concurrently pursuant to E.O. 13599 for acting for or on behalf of various Government of Iran entities.  Polat, who is also associated with Faylaca Petroleum, participated in a scheme in which Faylaca Petroleum and other Sima General Trading-associated front companies, known to have worked with Iran to market crude oil and petroleum products, collaborated to obscure the origin of Iranian gas condensate.    Seyedeh Hanieh Seyed Nasser Mohammad Seyyedi, the daughter of previously designated Seyed Seyyedi, is Faylaca Petroleum’s Managing Director and actively manages the company’s operations.  In early 2014, she was involved in start-up operations for Faylaca Petroleum after it was purchased by NICO.   Lissome Marine Services LLC   Lissome Marine Services LLC’s vessels provide support to NITC, Iran’s primary shipper of crude oil, by facilitating ship-to-ship transfers.  In addition, Treasury is identifying six vessels that belong to Lissome Marine Services LLC.      Sanctions for Material Support to the Central Bank of Iran or the Purchase or Acquisition of U.S. Dollar Bank Notes by the Government of Iran under E.O. 13622   Asia Bank   Asia Bank (formerly Chemeximbank) is an Iranian-owned bank that has provided support to the Central Bank of Iran and designated Iranian banks.  In mid-2014, Asia Bank converted and facilitated the delivery from Moscow to Tehran of U.S. dollar bank notes valued at over $13 million to representatives of the Iranian government.  Asia Bank officials coordinated the deposit conversion, delivery, and payment of the U.S. dollar bank notes.  In 2013, Asia Bank pursued correspondent relationships on behalf of the Export Development Bank of Iran (EDBI), which was designated in October 2008 pursuant to E.O. 13382.  Asia Bank has acted on behalf of another E.O. 13382-designated Iranian bank, Bank Tejarat, by assisting in setting up accounts on its behalf.    Identification of Additional Iranian Banks under E.O. 13599   The following five Iranian banks are being identified as Iranian financial institutions, which therefore, are blocked pursuant to E.O. 13599.   Khavarmianeh Bank, Ghavamin Bank, Gharzolhasaneh Resalat Bank, Kish International Bank, and Kafolatbank   Kharvarmianeh Bank andGhavamin Bank are privately owned banks located in Iran.  Gharzolhasaneh Resalat Bank, located in Iran, is also an Iranian financial institution. Kish International Bank is 55 percent owned by the Government of Iran via Refah Bank.  Tajikistan-based Kafolatbank is owned by Sarmayeh Bank, which was identified as an Iranian financial institution by the U.S. Department of the Treasury in July 2012.   New and Updated Counter-Terrorism-Related Designations under E.O. 13224    Meraj Air, Caspian Air, and Sayyed Jabar Hosseini
Meraj Air is a Government of Iran airline that has been used to ferry illicit cargo, including weapons, from Tehran to the Syrian regime since at least 2013.  Caspian Air is an Iran-based airline that provides support to IRGC elements by transporting personnel, and illicit material, including weapons, from Iran to Syria. 
Since at least 2006, senior Iranian official Sayyed Jabar Hosseini has been the Managing Director of Liner Transport Kish (LTK).  LTK, which the IRGC has employed to support terrorist activities outside of Iran, was designated in December 2010 as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist pursuant to E.O. 13224.  As LTK’s Managing Director, Hosseini has coordinated Iranian shipments across the Levant as well as to Sudan.    Pioneer Logistics and Asian Aviation Logistics   Turkey-based Pioneer Logistics and Thailand-based Asian Aviation Logistics are two key Mahan Air front companies that have served as intermediaries for the sanctioned Iranian airline’s acquisition of aircraft material.  Mahan Air was designated in October 2011 pursuant to E.O. 13224 for providing financial, material and technological support to Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-Qods Force (IRGC-QF).   Pioneer Logistics acts for or on behalf of Mahan Air by receiving and purchasing aviation-related material for the designated airline.  In an effort to help Mahan Air evade sanctions, Pioneer Logistics has shipped aircraft parts to another U.S.-designated Mahan Air front company, UAE-based Avia Trust, for onward delivery to Mahan Air.  Mahan Air has also used Pioneer Logistics as a cutout for the repair and overhaul of aircraft parts and as a cutout to evade sanctions in order to purchase aircraft tires for its aircraft.   Asian Aviation Logistics also acts for or on behalf of Mahan Air and helps the airline evade sanctions by making payments on behalf of Mahan Air for the purchase of engines and other equipment.  Asian Aviation Logistics also employs at least one Mahan Air official.   Yas Air Alias: Pouya Air   Pouya Air is being identified today as an alias for designated Iranian airline Yas Air, which was designated in March 2012 pursuant to E.O. 13224 for acting for or on behalf of the IRGC-QF for transporting illicit cargo, including weapons, to Iran’s clients in the Levant.   In late 2012, Yas Air changed its name to Pouya Air, reflecting the third name change for this company since it began operations in 2000 as Qeshm Air.  The first name change was to Pars Air in 2006 and later to Yas Air in 2008.   Identifier Information   Name:                          Mohammad Javad Imanirad Title:                            Managing Director, Aluminat Passport:                      S7127156 (Iran)   Name:                          Arman Imanirad DOB:                          7 June 1984 POB:                           Arak, Iran Passport:                      WS188312 (Canada)   Name:                          Nefertiti Shipping Company  AKA:                                      Nefertiti Shipping  AKA:                                      Nefertiti Shipping and Maritime Services Address:                      El Horeya Rd., El Attarein, Alexandria, Egypt Address:                      Inside Damietta Port, New Damietta City, Egypt Address:                      403, El Nahda St., Port Said, Port Said, Egypt   Name:                          Sayyed Jabar Hosseini  DOB:                          3 October 1955   Name:                          Sazeh Morakab Co. Ltd Location:                     Unit 1, Third Floor, No. 183, Rashid St.                                     Tehran-Pars, Tehran, Iran   Name:                         Ali Gholami Title:                            Managing Director, Sazeh Morakab Passport:                     24471008 (Iran)   Name:                          Marzieh Bozorg Title:                            Commercial Director, Sazeh Morakab Passport:                      16650550 (Iran)    Name:                          Sahand Aluminum Parts Industrial Company (SAPICO) Address:                      P.O. 16595-159, Tehran, Iran   Name:                          Ardalan Machineries Company (ARMACO) Address:                      No.5, Elsami St. Golestane Sevvom St., Pasdaran St, Tehran, Iran   Name:                          Faylaca Petroleum AKA:                          Faylaca Petroleum Suppliers Est. Address:                     Office No. 209, Tower A, Al Majarah, P.O. Box 44636, Sharjah, Dubai, United Arab Emirates License:                      113988 Website:                      www.faylacapetroleum.com E-mail:                        info@faylacapetroleum.com   Name:                          Abdelhak Kaddouri DOB:                          30 Apr 1977 POB:                           Leuzigen, Bern, Switzerland Nationality:                 Swiss Citizenship:                 Switzerland   Name:                          Muzaffer Polat AKA:                          Muzzafar Polat DOB:                          20 July 1975 POB:                           Van, Turkey Nationality:                 Turkish Passport:                      U08215942 (Turkey) Resident ID Number: 784197524398415 (UAE) Resident ID Card Number: 062368408 (UAE) Expired Passport Number: U05400998 (Turkey) Residence Permit UID Number: 122808985 (UAE)   Name:                          Seyedeh Hanieh Seyed Nasser Mohammad Seyyedi DOB:                                      20 August 1985 POB:                           Orumiyeh, Iran Passport:                      K95579809 (Iran) Nationality:                 Iranian Passport:                      X13556955 (Iran)   Name:                          Lissome Marine Services LLC Address:                      Unit 1202, Al Attar Tower, Sheikh Zayed Road, Dubai, United Arab Emirates IMO Number:             5689933   Name:                          KATERINA 1 Vessel Type:                Crude Oil Tanker Flagging Jurisdiction:  Panama IMO Number:             9031959   Name:                          GAS CAMELLIA Vessel Type:                LPG Tanker Flagging Jurisdiction:  St. Kitts and Nevis IMO Number:             8803381   Name:                          MARIA Vessel Type:                Chemical/Products Tanker Flagging Jurisdiction:  St. Kitts and Nevis IMO Number:             9110626   Name:                          SUN OCEAN Vessel Type:                Chemical/Products Tanker Flagging Jurisdiction:  Panama IMO Number:             9408358   Name:                          TESS Vessel Type:                Crude Oil Tanker Flagging Jurisdiction:  St. Kitts and Nevis IMO Number:             8913564   Name:                          NAMI Vessel Type:                Chemical/Products Tanker Flagging Jurisdiction:  Panama IMO Number:             8419178   Name:                          Asia Bank AKA:                          Commercial Bank ‘Chemeximbank’ LTD AKA:                          Chemeximbank Address:                      Offices 7-15, 67-69, 4 ul Ilinka                                     Moscow 109012                                     Russian Federation Alt Address:               267-270 offices, 4, Ilinka Street,                                     Moscow, Russia, 109012 SWIFT/BIC:               CHEB RU MM BIK (RU):                  044585333 Website:                     http://ww.chemexim.ru Alt. Website:              http://www.asia-bank.ru/english/   Name:                          Khavarmianeh Bank AKA:                          Middle East Bank Address:                      No. 22, Second Floor Sabounchi St.                                     Shahid Beheshti Ave.                                     Tehran, Iran   Name:                          Ghavamin Bank AKA:                          Ghavamin Financial & Credit Ins. Address:                      No. 252 Milad Tower                                     Beginning of Africa Blvd.                                     Argentina Sq.                                     Tehran, Iran   Name:                          Gharzolhasaneh Resalat Bank Address:                      Biside the No. 1 Baghestan Alley                                     Saadat Abad Ave., Kaj Sq.                                     Tehran, Iran   Name:                          Kish International Bank AKA:                          Kish International Bank Offshore Company PJS Address:                      NBO-9                                     Andisheh Blvd, Sanayi Street                                     Kish Island, Iran   Name:                         Kafolatbank AKA:                          CJSC Kafolatbank Address:                      Apartment 4/1, Academics Rajabovs Street                                     Dushanbe, Tajikistan   Name:                          Meraj Air Location:                     Meraj Blvd, First of Mohammad Ali Ave., Azadi Sq., Tehran, Iran Telephone:                   982161954 Fax:                             982166029653   Name:                          Caspian Airlines Address 1:                   Mehrabad International Airport, Tehran, Iran Address 2:                   No. 5, Sabounchi St., Beheshti Ave., Tehran, Iran Telephone 1:                982188751783 Telephone 2:                982188751671 Fax 1:                          982188754387 Fax 2:                          982188751692 Email 1:                       casp_avia@hotmail.com   Name:                          Pioneer Logistics  AKA:                          Pioneer Logistics Havacilik Location:                     EGS Bloklari B 1 Blok K 1 D114 Yesilkoy Bakirkoy Istanbul, Turkey   Name:                          Asian Aviation Logistics Company Limited Location:                    805 Srinakarin Road, 2nd Floor Zone A 21 Tower, Suan Luang, Suan Luang, Bangkok 10540, Thailand      ###
