---
title: Treasury Department Sanctions a Taliban Funding Conduit and Two Key Taliban Figures
date: 2014-08-21
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2612
url: /news/press-releases/jl2612
---
*(Archived Content)*

  

***Action Targets a Pakistan-based Hawala, Hawaladar and one Taliban Commander***



** **



**WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today targeted the financial and leadership networks of the Taliban by designating one entity and two individuals as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224.  The Pakistan-based hawala, Haji Basir and Zarjmil Company (Basir Zarjmil Hawala), and, its owner, Haji Abdul Basir, are being designated for providing financial services or other support to the Taliban.  In addition, Taliban commander Qari Rahmat is being designated for acting for or on behalf of the Taliban.




The Taliban continues to conduct terrorist attacks against U.S. forces and innocent civilians, posing a direct threat to U.S. national security interests,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “Designating and isolating individuals who are directly involved in financing and supporting Taliban attacks remains a key Treasury Department objective.  We will continue to work to deprive terrorists of the funds necessary to sustain and perpetrate terrorist operations.”



The Basir Zarjmil Hawala, which is based in Chaman, Balochistan Province, Pakistan, distributes money to Taliban members in Afghanistan.  Taliban senior leaders in Quetta, Balochistan Province, Pakistan, and Chaman have preferred to transfer money to Taliban commanders through the Basir Zarjmil Hawala and the Haji Khairullah Haji Sattar hawala, which the Treasury Department and the United Nations sanctioned in June 2012.  In 2013, the Basir Zarjmil Hawala distributed thousands of dollars to Taliban commanders in Chaman, and in 2012 it conducted thousands of dollars in transactions related to weapons and other operational expenses for the Taliban.  The Basir Zarjmil Hawala has also made use of Pakistani banks to provide money to Taliban members.



Haji Abdul Basir owns and operates the Basir Zarjmil Hawala.  He had authority to distribute money to the Taliban and, over the last several years, Basir distributed thousands of dollars through his hawala to Taliban members in Chaman, Balochistan Province, Pakistan, and in Qandahar Province, Afghanistan.  Basir also transferred money to Taliban elders, and facilitated the travel of Taliban informants to Afghanistan.  As of 2012, Basir was considered to be the principal money exchanger for Taliban senior leadership in Pakistan.  In 2010, Basir solicited donations for the Taliban from Pakistani and Afghan expatriates living in Asia and the Middle East.



Qari Rahmat has been a Taliban commander since at least February 2010.  In early 2013, Rahmat served as a Taliban commander in the Shadaal Bazaar area of Achin District, Nangarhar Province, Afghanistan.  Rahmat directed the activities of approximately 300 Taliban operatives in Achin District and provided operational guidance and weapons to these operatives.  In late 2012, Rahmat was a Taliban commander who had recently led an attack on Afghan forces in Kot District, Nangarhar Province, Afghanistan.  As of mid-2012, Rahmat served under the Taliban shadow district chief for Achin District, Nangarhar Province, Afghanistan.  During this time, Rahmat was a Taliban facilitator who emplaced improvised explosive devices and conducted attacks against Coalition and Afghan forces.



Rahmat also collects taxes and bribes on behalf of the Taliban.  As of early 2013, Rahmat collected taxes from Shadaal Bazaar, Achin District, Nangarhar Province-based drug traffickers on behalf of the Taliban.



Rahmat has also provided lethal aid, housing, and guidance to Taliban fighters.  As of late 2012, Rahmat provided rocket propelled grenades, PKM light machine guns, and AK-47 assault rifles to the Taliban.  Rahmat also sheltered Taliban fighters at his guest house and provided tactical guidance to Taliban fighters during this period.  As of late 2011, Rahmat had a guest house in Achin District where Taliban members often stayed.



In addition to his operational and financial activities, Rahmat provides intelligence information to the Taliban.  As of early 2013, Rahmat provided his Taliban superiors with information on the activities of Afghan government officials and Afghan security forces in Achin District.  As of mid-2012, Rahmat gathered intelligence for the Taliban and investigated informants for its benefit.



As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons in which these individuals and entity have an interest are blocked, and U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.



**Identifying Information**



** **



**Name:                                     Haji Basir and Zarjmil Company Hawala**



AKA:                                      Haji Bashir and Zarjmil Hawala Company



AKA:                                      Haji Abdul Basir and Zar Jameel Hawala



AKA:                                      Haji Basir Hawala



AKA:                                      Haji Baseer Hawala



AKA:                                      Haji Abdul Basir Exchange Shop



AKA:                                      Haji Basir and Zarjamil Currency Exchange



AKA:                                      Haji Zar Jamil, Haji Abdul Baseer Money Changer



Main Office Location:                        Sanatan (variant Sanatin) Bazaar, Sanatan Bazaar Street, near                                                          Trench (variant Tranch) Road, Chaman, Balochistan Province,                                                         Pakistan



Branch Office Location:         Quetta, Pakistan



Branch Office Location:         Lahore, Pakistan



Branch Office Location:         Peshawar, Pakistan



Branch Office Location:         Karachi, Pakistan



Branch Office Location:         Islamabad, Pakistan



Branch Office Location:         Qandahar Province, Afghanistan



Branch Office Location:         Herat Province, Afghanistan



Branch Office Location:         Helmand Province, Afghanistan



Branch Office Location:         Dubai, United Arab Emirates



Branch Office Location:         Iran



** **



**Name:                                     Haji Abdul Basir**



AKA:                                      Haji ‘Abd Al-Basir



AKA:                                      Haji Basir Noorzai



AKA:                                      Abdul Baseer



AKA:                                      Abdal Basir



DOB:                                      1965



Alt. DOB:                               1963



Alt. DOB:                               1960



POB:                                       Balochistan Province, Pakistan



National ID Number:              5420124679187 (Pakistan)



Passport Number:                    AA3829182 (Pakistan)



Nationality:                             Afghan



Address:                                  Chaman, Pakistan



** **



**Name:                                     Qari Rahmat**



AKA:                                      Kari Rahmat



DOB:                                      1981



Alt. DOB:                               1982



POB:                                       Shadal (variant Shadaal) Bazaar, Achin District, Nangarhar                                                                         Province, Afghanistan



Address:                                  Kamkai Village, Achin District, Nangarhar Province, Afghanistan



Alt. address:                            Nangarhar Province, Afghanistan

  

###
