---
title: Treasury Department Targets Key Haqqani Network Leaders
date: 2014-02-05
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2284
url: /news/press-releases/jl2284
---
*(Archived Content)*

​    **WASHINGTON** - The U.S. Department of the Treasury today targeted the financial and support networks of the Haqqani Network leadership by designating Saidullah Jan, Yahya Haqqani, and Muhammad Omar Zadran as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) under Executive Order (E.O.) 13224.  All three are being designated for acting for or on behalf of the Haqqani Network while Muhammad Omar Zadran is also being designated for acting for or on behalf of the Taliban.   The Haqqani Network is a Taliban-affiliated group of militants that operates out of North Waziristan Agency, Pakistan and has been spearheading insurgent activity in Afghanistan. With this action, the U.S. Treasury and State Departments have designated 14 Haqqani Network individuals under E.O. 13224 since 2008. The State Department also designated the Haqqani Network as a Foreign Terrorist Organization under Executive Order 13224 in 2012.   The Haqqani network poses a grave threat to U.S. civilians, military personnel, and our broader interests in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “Where we have the opportunity to disrupt this network and undermine its ability to finance its activities, we will take action.  Today’s action underscores our resolve to continue targeting any potential means of support for the Haqqanis.”   As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property under U.S. jurisdiction in which Saidullah Jan, Yahya Haqqani, or Muhammad Omar Zadran have an interest are blocked, and U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.   SAIDULLAH JAN   As of 2013, Saidullah Jan is a senior member of the Haqqani Network (HQN), who has also acted at times as an HQN deputy, as the HQN commander for the Northern Zone of Afghanistan, and as a key HQN logistical coordinator.  In late 2013, Saidullah provided critical facilitation support to drivers and vehicles transporting HQN ammunition.  As of late 2011, Saidullah was also involved in the group’s recruiting efforts and conducted the evaluation of at least one HQN recruit.  In late 2013, Saidullah traveled to Saudi Arabia in the company of HQN fundraisers Khalil Haqqani, Fazl Rabi, and other HQN members including an attack facilitator.  In 2010, Saidullah traveled with a group of HQN leaders, including now-deceased HQN official Ahmed Jan, to Saudi Arabia.  In late 2013, Saidullah reportedly was trusted by Al-Qaida (AQ) members as an HQN associate who could help with any trouble, including arrest. As of early 2012, Saidullah Jan sometimes travelled with Yahya Haqqani to meet with now-deceased HQN financial emissary Nasiruddin Haqqani in Pakistan.    Khalil Haqqani was designated pursuant to E.O. 13224 on February 9, 2011, Fazl Rabi on June 21, 2011, and Nasiruddin Haqqani on July 22, 2010.    YAHYA HAQQANI   Yahya Haqqani (Yahya) is a senior Haqqani Network member who has been closely involved in the group’s military, financial, and propaganda activities.  Yahya has acted as de facto head of the group when senior-most leaders Sirajuddin Haqqani (Yahya’s brother-in-law), Badruddin Haqqani (deceased), and Khalil Haqqani were absent. Yahya has also assumed duties as a HQN logistician and has facilitated funding for Haqqani commanders including a subordinate of now-deceased HQN commander Sangin Zadran and HQN chief of suicide operations, Abdul Rauf Zakir.  Yahya has also acted as Sirajuddin Haqqani’s Arabic interpreter and messenger.   Yahya has conducted significant facilitation activities in support of HQN attacks and other activities.  In early 2013 he facilitated funding for HQN fighters. Also in early 2013, Yahya coordinated the transfer of supplies from the United Arab Emirates to HQN senior leader Khalil Haqqani.  In 2012, Yahya coordinated the distribution of improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and communications equipment, and he also reviewed preparations for the August 7, 2012 HQN attack against a Coalition Forward Operating Base in Logar Province, Afghanistan, in which thirteen people, including eleven Afghan civilians, were wounded.  Yahya likely had advance knowledge of the June 2011 attack on the Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul, Afghanistan, directed by Sirajuddin Haqqani and Badruddin Haqqani.  Eighteen people were killed and twelve were injured in the attack. As of 2011, Yahya delivered money from Sirajuddin Haqqani to HQN commanders for operations.   Yahya sometimes serves as a liaison between the HQN and AQ and he has maintained ties with AQ since at least mid-2009.  In this role, Yahya has provided money to AQ members in the region for their personal expenses.  As of mid-2009, he acted as the HQN’s primary liaison with foreign fighters, including Arabs, Uzbeks, and Chechens.   Yahya has also conducted and managed HQN and Taliban media and propaganda activities.  As of early 2012, Yahya usually met with Sirajuddin Haqqani to obtain final approval of the Taliban propaganda videos Yahya made.  Yahya has worked on HQN media activities since at least 2009 when he edited videos from fighters in Afghanistan working out of a media studio in a HQN madrassa.  As of late 2011, Yahya obtained money for HQN media expenses from Sirajuddin Haqqani or one of Sirajuddin Haqqani’s surrogates.    As of early 2012, Yahya travelled about twice a month, sometimes with Saidullah Jan, to meet with now-deceased HQN financial emissary Nasiruddin Haqqani in Pakistan.  Sirajuddin Haqqani was designated pursuant to E.O. 13224 on March 11, 2008, Badruddin Haqqani on May 11, 2011, Sangin Zadran on August 16, 2011, and Abdul Rauf Zakir on November 5, 2012.   MUHAMMAD OMAR ZADRAN   Muhammad Omar Zadran (Omar) is a Haqqani Network leader who as of 2013 was in command of over 100 militants active in Khowst Province, Afghanistan.  Omar has served as an HQN Shadow District Governor, and as a commander under HQN leader Sirajuddin Haqqani since 2005, and has planned or been instructed to plan attacks on behalf of the HQN since at least 2006.  Omar has worked with the Taliban, serving in 2010 as a member of the Miram Shah Shura Council established by the Taliban to discuss logistics for insurgents, training, assignments and other needs for commanders, and deployment of terrorist cells to southeastern Afghanistan.   Omar has participated in the preparation and planning of attacks against Afghan citizens, the Afghan government, and Coalition personnel in Afghanistan on behalf of both the HQN and the Taliban.  In early 2013, Omar was in charge of smuggling explosives into Afghanistan.  In 2012, Omar and dozens of other HQN members worked on a vehicle-borne improved explosive device (VBIED) attack against a Coalition Forces camp and was involved in attack planning against troops in Paktiya Province, Afghanistan.  Omar has coordinated logistics, training, and assignments with the Taliban.  As of 2011, Omar was involved in suicide attack planning.  In 2010, Omar was tasked by an HQN commander to kidnap and murder local Afghan nationals working for Coalition Forces in Khowst, Paktiya, Paktika, and Baghlan Provinces, Afghanistan.  In 2010, Omar and other militant leaders in the region agreed to intensify attacks against the Afghan government and Coalition forces, capture and control various districts, disrupt national assembly elections and road construction operations, and recruit local youths.  Also in 2010, Omar received orders from Sirajuddin Haqqani.   Please find a related graphic here:  [http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/20140205_haqqani.pdf](http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/20140205_haqqani.pdf)**Individual: SAIDULLAH  JAN**AKA: Abid Khan AKA: Saidullah Khan AKA:  Saidullah Hamas AKA: Sayedullah Khamas Title:  Mulawi DOB: 1982 DOB:  September 11, 1985 POB: Giyan District, Paktika Province, Afghanistan Nationality: Pakistan National identification no.: Pakistan National Identity Card Number 2170525247081**Individual: YAHYA  HAQQANI**AKA: Yaya Haqqani AKA:  Yahyah Haqqani AKA: Haroon DOB: 1982 DOB: 1978 POB: Miram Shah, Pakistan Nationality: Afghanistan Address:  The Haqqani Madrassa Compound in Miram Shah, Pakistan Address: Miram Shah, Pakistan Address:Danda Village, Miram Shah, Pakistan**Individual:  MUHAMMAD OMAR ZADRAN**AKA: Mohammad-Omar Jadran   Title 1: Maulawi Title 2:  Mullah DOB: 1958 POB: Sultan Kheyl Village, Spera District, Khowst Province, Afghanistan Office Address: Miram Shah, Pakistan      ###
