---
title: Treasury Department Targets Senior Official and Support Networks of Two Pakistan-based Terrorist Groups
date: 2014-09-30
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2653
url: /news/press-releases/jl2653
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Action Targets the Leader of Harakat ul-Mujahidin and the Financial Support Networks of Lashkar-e Tayyiba **



**WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today took action against two Pakistan-based terrorist organizations by designating individuals and entities as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) under Executive Order 13224.  Specifically, the Treasury Department targeted the leader of Harakat ul-Mujahidin (HUM), and designated two individuals for acting for or on behalf of, and providing financial support to Lashkar-e Tayyiba (LT), as well as two entities the two individuals own or control.  As a result of today's action, all assets of those designated that are based in the United States or are in the control of U.S. persons are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.



Both LT and HUM are violent terrorist organizations that train militants and support the activities of many of the best known and brutal extremist groups, including al-Qaida, said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  Today's designations will disrupt efforts by these terrorist organizations to access their financial networks and the international financial system.



**Designations Related to Harakat ul-Mujahidin (also known as Ansar ul-Umma)**



As part of today's action, the Treasury Department is designating HUM leader Fazl-ur Rehman Khalil for acting for or on behalf of HUM.  HUM is a terrorist group that operates throughout India, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, and maintains terrorist training camps in eastern Afghanistan.  In 2005, HUM attacks in Kashmir killed at least 15 people, and in 2007, Indian troops were killed in a firefight with HUM militants in the area.  The U.S. Department of State designated HUM as a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) in 1997.  The group renamed itself Ansar ul-Umma in mid-2013.  The U.S. Department of State amended the designation of HUM in June 2014 to include Ansar ul-Umma as a HUM alias.



**Fazl-ur Rehman Khalil**



Khalil founded HUM, and as of 2014, has remained HUM's leader throughout various efforts to rebrand the group.  In 2008, Khalil was leader of the HUM shura council.  As of mid-2003, Khalil was the chief of Jamiat ul-Ansar in Pakistan, the name under which HUM had reorganized at the time.  As of October 1997, Khalil was the leader of Harkat ul-Ansar (HUA) and renamed HUA as HUM after HUA was listed by the United States as a terrorist organization.  As of late 2006, Khalil was appointed as the emir of a trust that, as of mid-2007, was being used by HUM to raise funds for the group.



In his capacity as HUM leader, Khalil has been involved in directing the group's affairs, and he has maintained control over all important HUM financial decisions.  Khalil receives funds sent or couriered to HUM, which he has used to purchase supplies for the group.  Khalil tasked a HUM leader in mid-2012 to collect donations to purchase weapons for unspecified fighters.  Also at this time, HUM sponsored a conference at Khalil's compound which was attended by 1,000 to 2,000 extremists and involved militant recruitment and the formation of fighting groups.  Khalil regularly traveled to the Persian Gulf as of late 2009 to meet with donors who funded a HUM-associated facility, and has also traveled to the region to raise funds for militants.



Khalil has maintained a close relationship with al-Qaida, including with Usama bin Laden (UBL) prior to his death.  Khalil was a key member of UBL's International Islamic Front and a cosignatory of UBL's first fatwa issued in 1998 calling for attacks against the United States.  In the 1990s, Khalil visited al-Qaida training camps.  Khalil sent Pakistani militants to support UBL's operatives in Somalia and UBL sent funds to unidentified Pakistan-based individuals via Khalil prior to September 2001.



**Designations Related to Lashkar-e Tayyiba**



In addition to the designation of Khalil, the Treasury Department also designated Muhammad Naeem Sheikh and Umair Naeem Sheikh for acting for or on behalf of, and for providing financial support to LT, as well as their Lahore, Pakistan-based businesses Abdul Hameed Shahab-Ud-Din (AHSD) and Nia International for being owned or controlled by Muhammad Naeem Sheikh and Umair Naeem Sheikh respectively.  To date, the Treasury Department has designated 27 individuals and 3 entities associated with LT.  This terrorist group was responsible for the deadly November 2008 terrorist attack in Mumbai, India that killed nearly 200 people and injured more than 300 people.  LT was designated as an SDGT and as an FTO in December 2001 and is also listed pursuant to UN Security Council Resolution 1267.



**Muhammad Naeem Sheikh**



Muhammad Naeem Sheikh has been a member of LT since the early days of the organization and is a financial supporter and fundraiser for the group.  Muhammad Naeem Sheikh has provided financial support to LT for over 10 years and has been responsible for soliciting wealthy businessmen to fund the group.  In late 2005, Muhammad Naeem Sheikh was identified as a regular donor to LT's Qasmani Cell network – an organization which maintained extensive association with elements of al-Qaida's leadership.



As of April 2009, Muhammad Naeem Sheikh was the president of Al-Anfal Trust, a funding source and financial repository used by LT front Falah-i-Insaniat Foundation (FIF) representatives to collect donations for LT.  Both Al Anfal Trust and FIF were identified as aliases for LT by the U.S. Department of State in June 25, 2014 and November 24, 2010 respectively.



**Umair Naeem Sheikh**



Umair Naeem Sheikh has been one of LT's most significant financial supporters.  Prior to February 2004, Umair Naeem Sheikh participated in light aircraft operations training provided by LT.  Since late 2008, Umair Naeem Sheikh has been identified as an LT financial donor and identified as visiting an LT militant camp.  As of mid-2011, Umair Naeem Sheikh served as an LT financial courier for the head of the organization's Afghanistan operations, Abdullah Mujahid, an SDGT designated by the Treasury Department in August 2012.



**Abdul Hameed Shahab-Ud-Din **



AHSD, a textile, leather, and shoe manufacturing and export company, is based in Lahore and owned by Muhammad Naeem Sheikh.  In past years, Muhammad Naeem Sheikh controlled numerous AHSD bank accounts in Lahore.  As of mid-2012, Umair Naeem Sheikh presented himself as a representative of AHSD while conducting a financial transaction.  In early 2009, Muhammad Naeem Sheikh planned to conduct business negotiations on behalf of AHSD with a Thai company and used AHSD letterhead to request a Thai visa.



**Nia International **



Nia International is a Lahore-based chemical products company controlled by its Chief Executive Officer, Umair Naeem Sheikh.  Nia International has been registered to Umair Naeem Sheikh since at least 2002.  As of mid-2010, Nia International was registered to Umair Naeem Sheikh under his Pakistani National Tax Number Certificate.  Umair Naeem Sheikh controls several Nia International bank accounts in Lahore.

  

**Individual #1 Name:                                          Fazl-ur Rehman Khalil**AKA:                                                                      Fazl ur-Rahman KhalilAKA:                                                                      Faisal Rahman KhalilAKA:                                                                      Fazlur Rehman KhalilTitle:                                                                      MaulanaTitle:                                                                      MoulanaTitle:                                                                      QariDOB:                                                                     963POB                                                                       PakistanPassport:                                                              CR9158341, PakistanComputerized National IdentityCard (CNIC) number                                          6110104398349, PakistanNational IdentityCard (NIC) number                                             14963091647, PakistanAddress:                                                                Kheyaban Sir Sayed,Street Two, Sector B27,Rawalpindi, PakistanAddress:                                                                Shams Colony, Islamabad, Pakistan

  

**Individual #2 Name:                                          Muhammad Naeem Sheikh**AKA:                                                                      Mohammad Nayeem SheikhAKA:                                                                      Sheikh NaeemAKA:                                                                      Muhammad NaeemAKA:                                                                      Shaikh NaimTitle:                                                                      EngineerDOB:                                                                     4 September 1950POB:                                                                      Lahore, PakistanNationality:                                                            PakistanComputerized National IdentityCard (CNIC) number:                                         35202-1963173-9Passport:                                                               Pakistan, No. BP5191731,Expiration Date: 12 May 2012Address:                                                                 122 Ahmed Block, New Garden Town, Lahore, PakistanAlt. Address 1:                                                        111-C Multan Road, Lahore, PakistanAlt. Address 2:                                                        2 Chamberlain Road, Lahore, Pakistan



**Individual #3 Name:                                          Umair Naeem Sheikh**AKA:                                                                      Umair NaeemDOB:                                                                     19 September 1980POB:                                                                      Lahore, PakistanCitizenship:                                                          PakistanComputerized National IdentityCard (CNIC) number:                                        35202-7366227-7Passport:                                                              Pakistan, AQ5192272, Expiration Date: 28 July 2012Address:                                                               122 Ahmed Block, New Garden Town,Lahore, Pakistan

  

**Business #1 Name:                                          Abdul Hameed Shahab-Ud-Din**AKA:                                                                      Abdul Hameed Shahab-U-DinAKA:                                                                      Abdul Hameed ShahabuddinAKA:                                                                      Abdul Hameed ShahabuddainAddress:                                                              2 Chamberlain Road, Lahore, PakistanAlt. Address 1:                                                     2 Chamberlain Road, Postal Code 54000Proprietor:                                                            Muhammad Naeem SheikhContact Person:                                                  Umair Naeem

  

**Business #2 Name:                                               Nia International**Address:                                                                   69 Circular Road, Lahore, PakistanChief Executive Officer:                                          Umair NaeemProprietor:                                                                 Umair Naeem

  

###
