---
title: Treasury Designates Additional Supporters of the Al-Nusrah Front and Al-Qaida
date: 2014-08-22T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2613
url: /news/press-releases/jl2613
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Action Implements U.N. Security Council Resolution 2170 WASHINGTON** — On August 15, 2014, the United Nations Security Council adopted Resolution 2170, which targeted the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, formerly known as al-Qaida in Iraq) and the Syria-based, al-Qaida-linked terrorist organization Al Nusrah Front (ANF), and sanctioned additional terrorists supporting those groups.  In support of the U.N.’s action, the U.S. Department of the Treasury today imposed sanctions on two key financiers of ANF and al-Qaida, both of whom also have been included in the Annex to UNSCR 2170.

Abdul Mohsen Abdullah Ibrahim al-Sharikh and Hamid Hamad Hamid Al-‘Ali have been designated as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGT) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224.  Al-Sharikh has been designated for acting for or on behalf of ANF and al-Qaida, and Al-‘Ali has been designated for providing financial support to ANF and al-Qaida.  Today’s action, following on the heels of the August 6 designation of three key terrorist financiers of ISIL and ANF, continues to target the terrorist funding networks in the Arabian Peninsula.

With UNSCR 2170, the international community has also sanctioned Hajjaj Fahd Hajjaj Muhammad Shabib al-‘Ajmi, who is one of the three financiers Treasury designated as an SDGT on August 6, and Said Arif and Abu Mohammed al-Adnan, who were designated by the State Department earlier this week pursuant to E.O. 13224.

“We are determined to stem the flow of funds to terrorists in Syria and Iraq who continue to commit violent acts and threaten U.S and allied interests in the region.  UNSCR 2170 is an important tool in this effort, and we will continue to work with the United Nations to identify candidates for sanctions under this resolution,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “All nations should swiftly implement UNSCR 2170.”

 

** Abdul Mohsen Abdullah Ibrahim al-Sharikh ** Al-Sharikh is a senior ANF leader and al-Qaida facilitator based in Syria.  He moved to Syria in the spring of 2013 with other al-Qaida fighters and joined ANF, later becoming one of its top strategists.  In this role, al-Sharikh has used social media posts to demonstrate his aspiration to target Americans and U.S. interests.   He is included on Saudi Arabia’s list of most wanted terrorists.

Prior to his work in Syria with ANF, al-Sharikh served in early 2013 as chief of al-Qaida’s Iran-based extremist and financial facilitation network before the return of already designated al-Qaida facilitator Yasin al-Suri to the position.  Al-Sharikh has also previously served al-Qaida as a key financial facilitator in Pakistan.

 

** Hamid Hamad Hamid Al-'Ali ** Al-'Ali has raised tens of thousands of dollars to help ANF purchase weapons and supplies as well as directed donors in Kuwait to send financial and material support to the terrorist organization.  Al-'A1i has traveled to Syria to deliver funds to ANF and used students in Kuwait to courier funds to the group.  Al-'Ali has also facilitated the travel to Syria of individuals wishing to fight for ANF and provided these individuals with money to deliver to the terrorist organization.  Al-'A1i has referred to himself as an “al-Qaida commando” and has raised money for ANF and al-Qaida.

As a result of today’s designation, any assets these individuals may have under U.S. jurisdiction are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from doing business with them.  Under the U.N. resolution, al-‘Ali and al-Sharikh have also been added to the al-Qaida sanctions list and are subject to the associated international sanctions and travel ban.

 

** Identifying Information Name:              Abdul Mohsen Abdullah Ibrahim al-Sharikh ** AKA:              Abdul Mohsen Abdallah Ibrahim al Charekh

AKA:              Abdul Mohsen Abdullah Ibrahim Alsharekh

AKA:              Abd-al-Muhsin Abdallah al-Sharikh

AKA:              Abd-al-Latif al-Najdi

AKA:              Sanafi al-Nasr

AKA:              Ali Karimi

Nationality:     Saudi Arabia

Civil Identification Number:  1050433349

Passport:          G895402

POB:               Shagraa, Saudi Arabia

DOB:              July 12, 1985

DOB:              July 13, 1985

DOB:              December 7, 1985

 

** Name: Hamid Hamad Hamid Al-'Ali ** AKA: Hamid Hamad al-'Ali

AKA: Hamad Hamid al-'Ali

AKA: Abu Sultan

POB: Qatar

DOB: 17 November 1960

Nationality: Kuwait

Passport: Kuwait 001714467

Alternate Passport: 101505554

Phone: 96597665333

 

###

​
