---
title: Treasury Targets Violent Mexican Narcotics Trafficker
date: 2014-08-27
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2616
url: /news/press-releases/jl2616
---
*(Archived Content)*

**  **



***Action Targets Sajid Emilio Quintero Navidad, ******Cousin of Fugitive Drug Lord Rafael Caro Quintero***



* *



**WASHINGTON **– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the designation of Mexican national Sajid Emilio Quintero Navidad (a.k.a. El Cadete), a Sonora, Mexico-based narcotics trafficker who coordinates the transportation of ton quantities of cocaine from Guatemala and Bolivia through Sonora to the United States and who plays a significant role in international drug trafficking.  Pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act), this designation prohibits U.S. persons from conducting financial or commercial transactions with Quintero Navidad and also freezes any assets he may have under U.S. jurisdiction.



Sajid Quintero Navidad, the cousin of fugitive Mexican drug lord Rafael Caro Quintero, who has been at large since August 9, 2013, is the Sonora plaza boss for the Beltran Leyva Organization and is responsible for conducting enforcement operations against the Sinaloa Cartel.  Several banners placed in Hermosillo, Agua Prieta, and Nogales, Sonora during 2012 identified Quintero Navidad as being responsible for murders, kidnappings, and fuel robberies occurring in Sonora.  Quintero Navidad was previously a member of the Sinaloa Cartel and a close associate of Ismael Zambada Garcia (a.k.a. Mayo).  However, following territorial disputes with now-deceased Sinaloa Cartel lieutenant Gonzalo Inzunza Inzunza (a.k.a. Macho Prieto), Quintero Navidad aligned with the Beltran Leyva Organization and Fausto Isidro Meza Flores (a.k.a. Chapo Isidro).



“Sajid Quintero Navidad is a pivotal figure in the Sonora-Arizona corridor,” said Adam J. Szubin, the Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC).  “Today’s designation, along with the May 2013 designation of eight Sinaloa Cartel plaza bosses, demonstrates OFAC’s determination to target this critical Sonora-Arizona drug trafficking corridor, which is the primary route used to bring drugs from Mexico into the United States.”



The President has identified Rafael Caro Quintero (2000), Ismael Zambada Garcia (2002), the Beltran Leyva Organization (2008), the Sinaloa Cartel (2009), and Gonzalo Inzunza Inzunza (2011) as significant foreign narcotics traffickers pursuant to the Kingpin Act.  In January 2013, OFAC designated Fausto Isidro Meza Flores and the Meza Flores Organization as significant international narcotics traffickers pursuant to the Kingpin Act.



Today’s action was taken in close coordination with the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), specifically the Tucson Field Office and the Phoenix Field Division.



Since June 2000, more than 1600 entities and individuals have been named pursuant to the Kingpin Act for their role in international narcotics trafficking.  Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties.  Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million.  Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million. Other individuals could face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.




For a chart relating to today’s actions click*here*.

  

###
