---
title: Treasury Designates Leaders of La Oficina De Evigado’s Enforcement Operations
date: 2014-09-16T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2635
url: /news/press-releases/jl2635
---
*(Archived Content)* *​**Action Designates Eight Individuals as Underbosses for the Violent Colombian Criminal Group La Oficina*     **WASHINGTON** - The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated eight Colombian nationals, identified as underbosses for the criminal group La Oficina de Envigado (La Oficina) based in Medellín, Colombia, pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act).  As a result of today’s action, all assets of those designated today that are based in the United States or are in control of U.S. persons are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.    Treasury designated La Oficina as a Specially Designated Narcotics Trafficker pursuant to the Kingpin Act on June 26, 2014.  Aside from its direct involvement in narcotics trafficking, La Oficina also provides organized criminal groups in Colombia with violent enforcement services, including drug debt collection, extortion, and murder-for-hire.    “La Oficina’s cadres of enforcers intimidate, extort, and murder citizens and officials, including courageous judicial and law enforcement partners throughout Colombia,” said Adam J. Szubin, Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control.  “With today’s action, we are again targeting La Oficina and exposing its efforts to use violence to maintain its position as a governing force in Colombia’s narcotics trafficking underworld.”   Among the individuals targeted for sanctions today are Juan Carlos Mesa Vallejo (a.k.a. “Tom”), based in the Medellín suburb of Bello, but whose criminal influence extends throughout greater Medellín; Julian Andrey Gonzalez Vasquez (a.k.a. “Barny”), who operates in northeastern Medellín and is wanted by Colombian authorities in connection with the murder of two Colombian police officers in 2012; and Diego Alberto Muñoz Agudelo (a.k.a. “Diego Chamizo”), a longtime operative for La Oficina who works with previously designated La Oficina underboss Fredy Alonso Mira Perez (a.k.a. “Fredy Colas”).   Also designated today are a number of operatives for La Oficina who are currently incarcerated in Colombia but continue to coordinate criminal operations from inside prison, including Freyner Alfonso Ramírez Garcia (a.k.a. “Carlos Pesebre”); Jesús David Hernández Grisales (a.k.a. “Chaparro”); and Rubiel Medina Cardona (a.k.a. “Mono Amalfi”).    Today’s designation was taken in close coordination with the Drug Enforcement Administration.    Since June 2000 more than 1,600 individuals and entities have been named pursuant to the Kingpin Act for their role in international narcotics trafficking.  Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties.  Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million. Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million.  Other individuals could face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.   To see a chart relating to today’s action, click [here.](http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/20140916_oficina.pdf)  For a complete listing of designations pursuant to the Kingpin Act, click [here](http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/narco_designations_kingpin.pdf).   ###
