---
title: Treasury Targets Individuals Responsible for Attacks on Civilians and Ceasefire Violations in South Sudan
date: 2014-09-18
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2639
url: /news/press-releases/jl2639
---
*(Archived Content)*

   **  *Actions Target South Sudanese Military Commander and Leader of Anti-Government Force*
**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today sanctioned James Koang Chuol and Santino Deng Wol pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13664 for threatening the peace, security, or stability of South Sudan, and for expanding or extending the conflict or obstructing peace talks or processes in South Sudan.  These two individuals are also being designated for being leaders of groups whose members are likewise involved in these sanctionable activities.
The President signed E.O. 13664 on April 3, 2014, to help put an end to the cycle of violence that has claimed thousands of lives in South Sudan since December 2013.  This E.O. authorizes Treasury to impose sanctions on those who threaten the peace, security, or stability of South Sudan, obstruct the peace process, target U.N. peacekeepers, or are responsible for human rights abuses or other atrocities in South Sudan.
“Both of the individuals we are designating today are prolonging the violent conflict in South Sudan and engaging in reprehensible violence,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “The United States, along with other members of the international community, will continue to shine a spotlight on violent acts committed by those on both sides of the conflict in South Sudan.”
**James Koang Chuol**James Koang Chuol (Koang) has been designated for threatening the peace, security, or stability of South Sudan, and for being a leader of anti-government forces in Unity State, South Sudan, whose members targeted civilians, including women and  children, with killing, sexual violence, and attacks on schools, hospitals, religious sites, and locations where civilians were seeking refuge.
Koang defected from his position as the Fourth Division commander of the South Sudanese military, also known as the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (“SPLA”) in December 2013. Taking orders from Koang, defecting soldiers executed as many as 260 of their on-base counterparts before targeting and killing civilians in the state capital of Bentiu. 
In February 2014, after Koang was given command of anti-government forces in Unity State, those forces attacked United Nations camps, hospitals, churches, and schools, engaging in widespread rape, torture, and the destruction of property, in an attempt to flush out civilians, soldiers, and policemen allied with the government.  On April 14-15, 2014, Koang’s forces captured Bentiu after heavy fighting and engaged in attacks against civilians. In separate incidents at a Bentiu mosque, church, and abandoned food compound, forces separated civilians who were taking shelter by their ethnicity and nationality before engaging in targeted killings, leaving at least 200 dead and 400 wounded.
**Santino Deng Wol**Santino Deng Wol (Deng Wol), an SPLA Major General and commander of the SPLA’s Third Division, has been designated for engaging in actions that expand or extended the conflict in South Sudan or obstructed peace talks or processes, and for being a leader of forces whose members also expanded or extended the conflict, or obstructed peace talks or processes.
Deng Wol led and directed military actions against opposition forces and conducted confrontational troop movements after the signing, and therefore in violation, of the January 23rd Cessation of Hostilities agreement.
Soon after negotiators from both sides agreed to cease hostilities, Deng Wol prepared his forces to advance on the Unity State town of Leer.  They subsequently ambushed and shelled rebel fighters near Leer.
In mid-April 2014, Deng Wol’s forces reportedly prepared to recapture Bentiu from anti-government forces.  Later that month, Deng Wol’s forces captured Mayom following a fierce battle in which they killed over 300 opposition forces.  Then, in early May 2014, Deng Wol’s forces captured Tor Abyad, killing opposition forces in the process.  Shortly thereafter, SPLA forces, including Deng Wol’s forces again broke the Cessation of Hostilities agreement by assembling troops to attack the Unity State town of Wang Kai.  SPLA forces recaptured Wang Kai shortly thereafter, and Deng Wol authorized his forces to kill anyone carrying weapons or hiding in homes, and ordered them to burn any homes containing opposition supporters.
**Identifying Information:**  Name: JAMES KOANG CHUOL AKA: James Koang Chol Ranley AKA: James Koang Chol AKA: Koang Chuol Ranley AKA: James Koang Chual DOB: 1961 Passport: R00012098, South Sudan Title:    Major General
Name: SANTINO DENG WOL AKA: Santino Deng Wuol AKA: Santino Deng Kuol DOB: November 9, 1962 Title:    Major General     ###
