---
title: Sarah Bloom Raskin Confirmed As Deputy Secretary of the Treasury
date: 2014-03-12
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2321
url: /news/press-releases/jl2321
---
*(Archived Content)*

​ ****  **WASHINGTON** – Sarah Bloom Raskin was confirmed by the United States Senate today to serve as Deputy Secretary of the Treasury.   “I am very pleased that the U.S. Senate showed broad support today in confirming Sarah Bloom Raskin as Deputy Secretary. The Treasury Department is gaining a proven and experienced leader who is dedicated to promoting economic prosperity, and enhancing business and consumer confidence. I look forward to working with her to safeguard our financial system, drive growth, create jobs, and expand opportunity for all Americans,” said Secretary Jacob J. Lew. “At the same time, I want to thank Under Secretary for Domestic Finance Mary Miller for skillfully serving as Acting Deputy Secretary.”   In 2010, Raskin was confirmed by the Senate to serve as a Governor of the Board of the Federal Reserve, where she helped conduct the nation’s monetary policy, regulate banking institutions and implement Wall Street Reform. From 2007-2010, Raskin served as Commissioner of Financial Regulation for the State of Maryland. As Commissioner, she regulated Maryland’s financial institutions – both banking and non-banking – and navigated the State’s response to the financial crisis, focusing on supporting community banks and protecting consumers.   Prior to serving as Commissioner, Raskin was Managing Director at the Promontory Financial Group, General Counsel of the WorldWide Retail Exchange, and General Counsel of Columbia Energy Services Corporation. She earlier served as Banking Counsel for the U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.   Ms. Raskin received her B.A. in economics from Amherst College, and she received her J.D. from Harvard Law School.   ###
