---
title: Treasury Designates Major Colombian Narcotics Trafficker with Ties to the Sinaloa Cartel
date: 2014-11-06T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2690
url: /news/press-releases/jl2690
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Action Targets Prominent Cocaine Supplier who has Supported Numerous Violent Drug Cartels for over a Decade WASHINGTON –**The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the designation of German Alberto Perez Ocampo, a prolific cocaine supplier to Mexican cartels for more than a decade, pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act). In addition, and also under the Kingpin Act, Treasury is designating German Alberto Perez Ocampo’s brother, Santiago Perez Ocampo, and one Colombian import company, Compra Venta Gerpez. As a result of today’s action, all assets of those designated today that are based in the United States or are in the control of U.S. persons are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.

German Alberto Perez Ocampo is being designated for his role as a significant international narcotics trafficker and for his ties to the Sinaloa Cartel. He is a major cocaine supplier to Sinaloa Cartel leader, Ismael “El Mayo” Zambada Garcia. German Alberto Perez Ocampo has also partnered with numerous international drug trafficking organizations, including the Beltrán Leyva Organization and La Familia Michoacana in Mexico, Los Cachiros in Honduras, and Los Urabeños in Colombia. The President identified all of these organizations as significant foreign narcotics traffickers between 2007 and 2013.

“Despite being a prominent narcotics trafficker, German Alberto Perez Ocampo evaded law enforcement for more than a decade,” said Adam J. Szubin, Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control. “His work supplying cocaine to many of the most violent drug cartels targeted by the U.S. government underscores his global reach, and it is time that he is brought to justice.”

German Alberto Perez Ocampo is the sole administrator and chief executive of Compra Venta Gerpez, a Tuluá, Valle, Colombia, import and article resale company that the Treasury Department is designating today. The Treasury Department is also designating German Alberto Perez Ocampo’s brother, Santiago Perez Ocampo, for providing support to German Alberto Perez Ocampo’s drug trafficking activities. In the past, Santiago Perez Ocampo has served as German Perez Ocampo’s enforcer and is currently responsible for helping to manage his brother’s business operations.

Today's action was taken in close coordination with the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) and the Government of Mexico.

“German Alberto Perez Ocampo is one of the last remaining ‘old guard’ drug traffickers in Colombia. Through his criminal association with high level Mexican drug traffickers, German Alberto Perez Ocampo was able to export multi-ton kilo quantities of cocaine. The DEA continues to go after the highest level traffickers as evidenced by the designation of German Alberto Perez Ocampo by the U.S. Treasury Department as a drug Kingpin,” said A. D. Wright, DEA Miami Field Division Acting Special Agent in Charge.

Since June 2000, more than 1,600 entities and individuals have been named pursuant to the Kingpin Act for their role in international narcotics trafficking. Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties. Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million. Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million. Other individuals could face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.

To see a chart relating to today’s action, click[*here.*](http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/20141106_perez_ocampo.pdf)

For a complete listing of designations pursuant to the Kingpin Act, click[*here.*](http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/narco_designations_kingpin.pdf)

###
