---
title: Karen Dynan Confirmed as Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy
date: 2014-06-26T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2442
url: /news/press-releases/jl2442
---
*(Archived Content)*

 

**WASHINGTON** –Karen Dynan was confirmed by the United States Senate today by voice vote to serve as the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy.  In this role, Dynan will lead the Office of Economic Policy, which is responsible for analyzing and reporting on current and prospective economic developments in the U.S. and world economies and assisting in the determination of appropriate economic policies.

 

“From her tenure of nearly two decades at the Federal Reserve, to her role at the White House Council of Economic Advisers, Karen is a long-time public servant whose remarkable career and thoughtful research has already made a critical contribution to this Administration. I am confident that this role will allow her to further build on these significant efforts to move our economic policy agenda forward,” said Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew. “While our economy has made considerable progress, we still have more work to do to spur job creation and bolster economic growth, and I know that Karen is precisely the kind of leader that we need to drive this charge at the Treasury.”

 

Prior to joining Treasury, Dynan was the vice president and co-director of the Economic Studies program at The Brookings Institution from 2009 to 2013. Before this, she served at the Federal Reserve Board for 17 years, focusing on a breadth of macroeconomic issues, including household economic security. She also previously held the position of senior economist at the White House Council of Economic Advisors and visiting assistant professor at Johns Hopkins University.

 

Dyn

an received her Ph.D. in Economics from Harvard University and her A.B. from Brown University. She lives in Bethesda, Maryland with her husband and twin daughters.

   

###
