---
title: Treasury Announces Marketable Borrowing Estimates
date: 2014-02-03
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2277
url: /news/press-releases/jl2277
---
*(Archived Content)*

  **View the Sources and Uses table here​.** 

**WASHINGTON -**The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced its current estimates of net marketable borrowing for the January – March 2014 and April – June 2014 quarters:



During the January – March 2014 quarter, Treasury expects to issue $284 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-March cash balance of $130 billion.  This borrowing estimate is $19 billion higher than announced in October 2013.  The increase in borrowing relates primarily to changes in cash balance assumptions [[1]] offset by higher receipts.


- During the April – June 2014 quarter, Treasury expects to pay down $40 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-June cash balance of $150 billion.

- During the October – December 2013 quarter, Treasury issued $264 billion in net marketable debt and ended the quarter with a cash balance of $162 billion.  In October 2013, Treasury had estimated $266 billion in net marketable debt and assumed an end-of-December cash balance of $140 billion.  The decrease in borrowing is driven by the higher receipts, lower outlays, offset by a higher ending cash balance.


Additional financing details relating to Treasury’s Quarterly Refunding will be released at 8:30 a.m. on Wednesday, February 5, 2014.




[1]

  

**Cash Balance Assumptions**



**October - December Quarter**



**January - March Quarter**



Prior



Current



Change



Prior



Current



Change



Opening Balance



$88



$88



$0



$140



$162



$22



Closing Balance



$140



$162



$22



$45



$130



$85



Impact on Borrowing



$52



$74



$22



-$95



-$32



$63
