---
title: Treasury Sanctions Iranian Official for Human Rights Abuses
date: 2014-05-23T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2411
url: /news/press-releases/jl2411
---
*(Archived Content)*

*Targets Former Governor-General of Tehran Province *

*Involved in Censorship and Other Activities*

* *

**WASHINGTON** –Today the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced sanctions against Morteza Tamaddon, an Iranian government official, for being involved in censorship and other activities that limit the freedom of expression and freedom of assembly of Iran’s citizens.  This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13628, which authorizes Treasury to designate those who engage in censorship or other activities that limit the freedom of expression or assembly of the Iranian people.

“The United States is keenly focused on promoting opportunities for the Iranian people to fully exercise their universal rights,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “We will continue building on the U.S. Government’s longstanding efforts to contest the Iranian government censorship of the Iranian people.”

Morteza Tamaddon is currently the head of the Tehran Provincial Public Security Council.  As former Governor-General of Tehran Province, he used his authority to penalize the exercise of and limit Iranians’ freedom of expression and assembly following the disputed 2009 elections in Iran. Tamaddon has been personally responsible for the harassment of Iranian political opposition leaders Mehdi Karroubi and Mir-Hossein Mousavi.  In addition, he used his position to cut off mobile phone communications during political demonstrations and to silence and intimidate Iranian citizens in 2012 by publicly threatening political protestors.

Tamaddon has been placed on the Office of Foreign Assets Control’s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons.  All property and interests in property in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons in which the individual designated today has an interest are blocked, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with him.  In addition, any foreign financial institution or person that facilitates significant transactions or provides material support to the designated entities or individuals may have their access to the U.S. financial system severed or their property and interests in property under U.S. jurisdiction blocked.

**Identifying Information**Individual:      Morteza Tamaddon

DOB:              1959

POB:               Shahr Kord-Isfahan, Iran

   

###

​
