---
title: Treasury Designates Al-Qa’ida Leaders In Syria
date: 2014-05-14T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2396
url: /news/press-releases/jl2396
---
*(Archived Content)*

*Undermines al-Qa'ida's Efforts to Move Money and Fighters to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant and Al-Nusrah Front in Syria*

**WASHINGTON** –The U.S. Department of the Treasury today imposed sanctions on two al-Qa'ida supporters in Syria.  Abd Al-Rahman Muhammad Zafir Al-Dubaysi Al-Juhni (Al-Juhni) and 'Abd Al-Rahman Mustafa Al-Qaduli (Al-Qaduli) were named as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224.  Al-Juhni and Al-Qaduli are being designated for acting for or on behalf of al-Qa'ida and the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), respectively.

In mid-2013, Al-Juhni was part of a group of senior al-Qa'ida members in Syria formed to conduct external operations against Western targets and to mediate tensions between Al-Nusrah Front (ANF) and ISIL, formerly known as al-Qa'ida in Iraq (AQI).  Al-Qaduli is a senior ISIL official who reintegrated himself into ISIL following his release from prison in early 2012 and traveled to Syria to work in a Syria-based ISIL network.

We are very concerned about al-Qa'ida networks moving money and fighters to extremist groups in Syria, said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  Our action today highlights al-Qa'ida and similar groups' efforts to take advantage of the unrest in Syria and sends a strong warning to the legitimate Syrian opposition and those who wish to support it that they must reject the attempts of al-Qa'ida, ISIL, and al-Nusra to elicit support for their cause by preying on the sympathies of the international community for the plight of the Syrian people.

As a result of today's designation, any assets these individuals may have under U.S. jurisdiction are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from doing business with them.

**Abd Al-Rahman Muhammad Zafir Al-Dubaysi Al-Juhni** Al-Juhni is designated for acting for or on behalf of al-Qa'ida.  He has performed various administrative duties for al-Qa'ida, including arranging the payment of funds, passing messages and arranging meetings for senior al-Qa'ida figures.  Between 2006 and 2009, Al-Juhni provided logistical support to al-Qa'ida in Afghanistan.  Al-Juhni was responsible for al-Qa'ida's communications courier network in Waziristan in late 2008, and by mid-2009, was in charge of al-Qa'ida administrative affairs for several areas in North and South Waziristan.  Before his departure from Pakistan to Syria, Al-Juhni served on al-Qa'ida's Central Shura Council and as the al-Qa'ida Chief of Security responsible for counterintelligence.

Al-Juhni was listed in early 2011 by the Saudi Arabian Government as wanted in connection with membership or association with al-Qa'ida or its regional affiliates.  He was charged by Saudi Arabian authorities with calling for armed combat; considering Saudi Arabia a legitimate field for battle; being a key al-Qa'ida leader in Afghanistan and Waziristan; traveling to Afghanistan to join al-Qa'ida; training in the use of various weapons, explosives and toxins; providing logistical support to al-Qa'ida in Afghanistan; calling for the murder of citizens and residents; and the targeting of important facilities and residential compounds.  Al-Juhni remains on Saudi Arabia's list of 47 most wanted criminals.

As of mid-2013, Al-Juhni had traveled to Syria accompanied by several individuals to participate in the fighting there and was working with counterparts in Pakistan to acquire heavy weaponry and trainers to support al-Qa'ida efforts in Syria.  During this time, he maintained an affiliation with al-Qa'ida leadership in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas of Pakistan.

**'Abd Al-Rahman Mustafa Al-Qaduli** Al-Qaduli is designated for acting for or on behalf of ISIL.  He joined al-Qa'ida in 2004 under the command of now-deceased AQI leader Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and served as Zarqawi's deputy and the AQI emir of Mosul, Ninawa Province, Iraq.  Al-Qaduli was an assistant to al-Zarqawi while in al-Qa'ida and previously served as AQI's representative to al-Qa'ida senior leadership in Pakistan.  Al-Qaduli traveled in February 2006 to Pakistan on behalf of al-Zarqawi to conduct an interview, which was then to be provided to al-Qa'ida leaders in Afghanistan.** Identifying Information**

'Abd Al-Rahman Muhammad Zafir Al-Dubaysi Al-JuhniAKA: 'Abd Al-Rahman Muhammad Zafir al-Dubaysi al-JahniAKA: 'Abd Al-Rahman Muhammad Zafir al-Dubaysi al-JahaniAKA: 'Abd Al-Rahman Muhammad Zafir al-Dubaysi al-JuhaniAKA: Abdulrhman Mohammed D. AljahaniAKA: Abu al-Wafa'AKA: Abu AnasAKA: Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Zafir al-Dabisi al-JahaniAKA: Abu Wafa al-SaudiAKA: Abu al-WafaAKA: 'Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Thafir al-JahniAKA: Abd al-Rahman Muhammad al-JuhaniNational Identity: 1027508157, Saudi ArabiaNationality: SaudiPlace of Birth: Kharj, Saudi ArabiaPassport Number: F508591DOB: 4 December 1971Alt. DOB: 1977

'Abd Al-Rahman Mustafa Al-QaduliAKA: 'Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Mustafa ShaykhlarAKA: Abu-ShuaybAKA: Umar Muhammad Khalil MustafaAKA: Abdul Rahman Muhammad al-BayatiAKA: Tahir Muhammad Khalil Mustafa al-BayatiAKA: Hajji ImanAKA: Abu ImanAKA: Abu AlaAKA: Abu HasanAKA: Abu MuhammadAKA: Abu ZaynaAKA: Aliazra Ra'ad AhmadDOB 1: 1959DOB 2: 1957POB: Mosul, Ninawa Province, IraqNationality: Iraq

 

###
