---
title: Treasury Targets Networks for Facilitating Iran’s Ballistic Missile Procurement and Supporting Oil Sanctions Evasion
date: 2014-04-29T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2372
url: /news/press-releases/jl2372
---
*(Archived Content)*

*Underscores U.S. Commitment to Enforce Iran Sanctions Worldwide* * * **WASHINGTON** –Today the U.S. Department of the Treasury sanctioned individuals and entities for aiding Iranian ballistic missile procurement and for support to the Government of Iran in evading oil sector sanctions pursuant to Executive Orders (E.O.) 13382 and 13645, respectively.  Today’s actions demonstrate the U.S. Government’s commitment to vigorously enforce existing U.S. sanctions even as we implement the sanctions relief contained in the Joint Plan of Action between the P5+1 and Iran.  These actions are intended to deter future sanctions evasion and prevent Iran from procuring sensitive technologies while we negotiate a comprehensive solution that will prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon and ensures its nuclear program is exclusively peaceful.    “Treasury designated proliferator Karl Lee several years ago for procuring ballistic missile parts for Iran, and today’s actions take aim at his network of front companies.  In addition, we are taking action today against a firm and several individuals involved in shady and deceptive oil deals with Iran,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “As we have made clear, we will continue vigorously to enforce our sanctions, even as we explore the possibility of a comprehensive deal addressing Iran’s nuclear program.”** Iran’s Missile Proliferation Activities** Treasury is sanctioning the following entities pursuant to E.O. 13382, which, among other things, targets proliferators of weapons of mass destruction and their support networks.   *Karl Lee (aka Li Fangwei) Front Companies*   Treasury designated eight China-based front companies for acting for or on behalf of Karl Lee, a known proliferator for Iran’s ballistic missile program.  Karl Lee (aka Li Fangwei) was designated pursuant to E.O. 13382 in April 2009, as the commercial manager of LIMMT Economic and Trade Company Ltd.  Additionally, several aliases for LIMMT were also identified in April 2009.  LIMMT Economic and Trade Company Ltd. was designated pursuant to E.O. 13382 in June 2006 for providing material support to Iran's ballistic missile program.    Following Sino Metallurgy and Minmetals Industry Co. Ltd.’s 2009 designation as an alias for LIMMT, Karl Lee directed companies with which LIMMT had contracts to send funds to other Karl Lee front companies, including **Sinotech Industry Co., Ltd. and MTTO Industry and Trade Limited.**   Lee has also used** Success Move Ltd.** and Sinotech Industry Co., Ltd. in his dealings with Iran and to receive funds from Iran for the purchase of goods.   Lee manages** Sinotech Dalian Carbon and Graphite Manufacturing Corporation**, which along with another front company,** Dalian Zhongchuang Char-White Co., Ltd.**, has been used by Lee to send at least 23 separate shipments to Iran.  Sinotech Dalian Carbon and Graphite Manufacturing Corporation also uses MTTO Industry & Trade Limited and** Karat Industry Co. Ltd.,** as front companies.** Dalian Zhenghua Maoyi Youxian Gongsi (aka Dalian Zenghua Trading Co., Ltd.**) is also a front company Lee uses in his financial dealings with Iran.  Lee entered into a contract with a Chinese manufacturer in which the Chinese manufacturer agreed to provide an aramid fiber production line to Dalian Zenghua Trading Co., Ltd.  After the contract between Dalian Zenghua Trading Co., Ltd. and the Chinese manufacturer was signed, Lee used a bank account previously associated with Karat Industry Co., Ltd., to transmit the down payment for the Iranian company's aramid fiber production line.   Since 2013, Karl Lee has also used and continues to use** Tereal Industry & Trade Limited** as a front company for his dealings with Iran.** Support to Iranian Oil Sanctions Evaders** * * *Saeed Al Aqili, Al Aqili Group LLC, and Anwar Kamal Nizami*   Treasury is designating **Saeed Al Aqili**, the co-owner, Vice Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Al Aqili Group LLC pursuant to E.O. 13645 for providing support in connection with deceptive oil deals for Iran.  Saeed Al Aqili uses his companies to assist Iran in selling oil in evasion of sanctions.  Treasury is also identifying Al Aqili Group LLC for being owned by Saeed Al Aqili.  Activities of Al Aqili Group LLC include arranging oil sales for the IRGC and facilitating the circumvention of oil sanctions by disguising the oil’s origin.  Saeed Al Aqili also regularly does business in Iran and has conducted financial transactions with, or on behalf of, the Central Bank of Iran and Bank Melli Iran.   Saeed Al Aqili also assists Seyed Seyyedi’s group of front companies.  Saeed Al Aqili and his representatives, working in conjunction with representatives of Sima General Trading, gave Seyyedi the authority to manage and conduct banking activities on behalf of KASB International LLC.  Seyyedi and a network of his affiliated companies, including KASB International LLC, were identified pursuant to E.O. 13599 in September 2013 for providing support to Government of Iran entities, including NIOC, the Naftiran Intertrade Company (NICO) and Sima General Trading.  Sima General Trading was identified in March 2013 pursuant to E.O. 13599 for providing support to Government of Iran entities.  KASB International LLC, also known as First Furat Trading LLC, was one of the Al Aqili Group’s subsidiary companies.** Anwar Kamal Nizami** is a Dubai-based Pakistani financial facilitator for KASB International LLC and is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13645.  In his role as a financial expert, he manages the banking relationships and overall finances of KASB International LLC, which is not only affiliated with Saeed Al Aqili and Al Aqili Group LLC, but also with Seyyedi and his Iranian oil evasion network.  Nizami also works for Sima General Trading.** Identifying Information** Name: Mohamed Saeed Al Aqili AKA: Mohamed Saeed Mohamed Al Aqili DOB: 23 July 1955 POB: Dubai, UAE Passport Number: A2599829 UAE ID Number: 784-1955-8497107-1 Title: Vice Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Al Aqili Group LLC   Name: Al Aqili Group LLC AKA: Al Aqili Group of Companies Address: Oud Metha Tower, 10th Floor, PO Box 1496, Dubai UAE Website: [www.aqili.com](http://www.aqili.com/) E-mail: [info@aqili.com](mailto:info@aqili.com)   Name: Anwar Kamal Nizami DOB: 19 April 1980 Nationality: Pakistani Passport Number: AE9855872 Title: Accounts Manager, First Furat Trading LLC   Name: Sinotech Industry Co., Ltd. Address: No. 190 Changjiang Road, Dalian City, China   Name: MTTO Industry and Trade Limited Address: No. 9 Hongji Street, Xi Gang District, Dalian City, China   Name: Success Move Ltd. Address: No. 1109 Zhongshan Road, Dalian, China   Name: Sinotech Dalian Carbon and Graphite Manufacturing Corporation Address: Dalian, China   Name: Dalian Zhongchuang Char-White Co., Ltd. Address: 2501-2508 Yuexiu Mansion, No. 82 Xinkai Road, Dalian, Liaoning Province, 11601 China   Name: Karat Industry Co., Ltd. Address: No. 110 Baiyun Street, Dalian, Liaoning, China   Name: Dalian Zhenghua Maoyi Youxian Gongsi AKA: Dalian Zenghua Trading Co., Ltd. Address: Dalian, China   Name: Tereal Industry and Trade Limited Address: No. 9 Hongji Street, Xi Gang District, Dalian City, China     ###
