---
title: Statement Of Secretary Jacob J. Lew At Bilateral Meeting With Vice Chancellor Of Germany And Minister Of Economic Affairs And Energy Sigmar Gabriel
date: 2014-06-19T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2435
url: /news/press-releases/jl2435
---
*(Archived Content)*

​ **As Prepared for Delivery BERLIN, GERMANY** - Thank you to our gracious host.   I was pleased to be able to meet today with Vice Chancellor Gabriel.  I hope this will be the first of many productive meetings.   Germany and the United States are strong partners.  Our two nations share many priorities, and our top priority is promoting growth and creating jobs.  To achieve that goal we are working together in a variety of areas, including the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, through our work at the G-20, and through our ongoing bilateral dialogue.   Today, we had the opportunity to discuss the German government’s domestic economic agenda as well as recent developments in the U.S. and global economy.  We shared views on ways to promote stronger and a more balanced European growth.  And, I noted the recent steps taken by the German government to promote new investments, spur domestic demand, and reform energy policy.   We also discussed the situation in Ukraine and our cooperative efforts to support the Ukrainian people and government.  We continue to consult with our European and international partners on coordination of sanctions.  The United States is prepared to impose additional targeted financial measures on Russia if it continues to escalate the situation in Ukraine.   Vice Chancellor Gabriel and I look forward to continuing to work together to pursue policies that focus on jobs and growth for both of our nations, our regions and the world.   ### ​
