---
title: Ramin Toloui Confirmed as Treasury Assistant Secretary for International Finance
date: 2014-11-20
draft: false
press_release_number: JL9706
url: /news/press-releases/jl9706
---
*(Archived Content)*

  

**WASHINGTON**– Ramin Toloui was confirmed by the United States Senate today to serve as the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Assistant Secretary for International Finance. In this position, Toloui is responsible for leading Treasury’s work on international monetary policy, coordination with the G-20, and regional and bilateral economic issues.



“Ramin’s experience in the international arena, both in the private sector and at the Treasury Department, will be indispensable to the administration’s efforts to help strengthen the U.S. recovery by managing international economic issues,” said Secretary Jacob J. Lew. “At a time of complicated global challenges, Ramin will play a key role in promoting growth and job creation and helping to level the playing field for American workers and businesses.”



Prior to joining Treasury, Ramin Toloui served as global co-head of Emerging Markets Portfolio Management at PIMCO, a position he held since 2011, and chaired the firm’s Asia-Pacific Portfolio Committee since 2012. Mr. Toloui joined PIMCO in 2006 as a Portfolio Manager for emerging markets, adding responsibilities for global bond portfolios in 2009. Previously, Mr. Toloui held various positions at the Department of the Treasury, including Director of the Office of the Western Hemisphere from 2003 to 2006, Senior Advisor to the Under Secretary for International Affairs from 2001 to 2003, and Deputy Director and International Economist in the Office of Central and Southeastern Europe from 1999 to 2001.



Mr. Toloui received an A.B. from Harvard University and an M.Phil. from Balliol College at Oxford University.

  

###
