---
title: Treasury Announces Retirement Of Fiscal Assistant Secretary Richard Gregg, David Lebryk Appointed To Position
date: 2014-05-27
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2412
url: /news/press-releases/jl2412
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury announced today the retirement of Fiscal Assistant Secretary Richard (Dick) L. Gregg after more than four decades at Treasury.  David Lebryk, currently the Commissioner of the Bureau of the Fiscal Service, has been appointed to fill the position of Fiscal Assistant Secretary, and Sheryl Morrow, currently Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fiscal Operations and Policy at Treasury, will succeed Lebryk as Commissioner of the Bureau of the Fiscal Service.  The appointments are effective beginning June 30, 2014.

Dick has been a tremendous leader for the government's fiscal operations, helping to bring about changes that have revolutionized government transactions despite incredibly tough economic and budgetary circumstances, said Secretary Lew.  His relentless pursuit of a more modern, more efficient, less costly government has been the hallmark of his 41 years at Treasury.  We are particularly grateful to Dick for coming out of retirement in 2009 to assume the position of Fiscal Assistant Secretary where he provided steady leadership during an important time.  We owe him a debt of gratitude for his many years of service.

I am also glad to welcome Dave and Sheryl to their new positions at the helm of Treasury's fiscal operations. With nearly six decades of Treasury experience between them, we look forward to benefitting from their considerable knowledge and management experience as we continually seek to improve the services we provide to our citizens.

During his tenure at Treasury, Gregg held numerous senior management positions including Commissioner of the Bureau of the Public Debt for 10 years, Commissioner of the Financial Management Service for nine years, and most recently Fiscal Assistant Secretary for the past five years. Gregg has served under 16 Treasury Secretaries and was included in the first group of Senior Executives when the Senior Executive Service was established in 1979.

In assuming the position of Fiscal Assistant Secretary, Lebryk brings more than 25 years of service to the Treasury Department, including serving as the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fiscal Operations and Policy, Deputy Director and Acting Director of the U.S. Mint, and Commissioner of the Financial Management Service.  In 2012, Lebryk was appointed as the first Commissioner of the Bureau of Fiscal Service following the consolidation of the Bureau of the Public Debt and the Financial Management Service.

As the second Commissioner of the Bureau of the Fiscal Service, Morrow will build on Lebryk's work to unify the government's fiscal and debt operations under one central vision and leadership.  During her 34 years with Treasury, Morrow has held numerous positions spanning the government's fiscal operations which she will draw upon in this new role, including Assistant Commissioner for Payment Management and Chief Disbursing Officer at the Financial Management Service.

###
