---
title: Treasury Sanctions Two Senior Lashkar-E-Tayyiba Network Leaders
date: 2014-06-25T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL2440
url: /news/press-releases/jl2440
---
*(Archived Content)*

**Action Targets Leadership of Pakistan-based Terrorist Organization WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today targeted the financial and leadership networks of Lashkar-e-Tayyiba (LT) by designating Nazir Ahmad Chaudhry (Ahmad) and Muhammad Hussein Gill as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224.  Ahmad and Gill are being designated for acting for or on behalf of LT, a terrorist organization based in Pakistan.  Treasury and the Department of State have designated 22 individuals and four entities associated with LT.

The State Department today also maintained LT’s designation as a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) and added the following aliases to its listing of LT: Jama’at-ud-Dawa, Al-Anfal Trust, Tehrik-e-Hurmat-e-Rasool, and Tehrik-e-Tahafuz Qibla Awwal.  The State Department originally designated LT as an FTO in December 2001, and the group was added to the United Nations (UN) 1267/1989 Sanctions list in 2005.

“In targeting Lashkar-e-Tayyiba leadership, today’s action demonstrates our unrelenting commitment to combatting terrorism by disrupting terrorist groups’ financial activities,” said Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence David S. Cohen.  “We will continue to target LT’s financial foundation to disrupt and impede its violent activities.”

LT was responsible forthe deadly November 2008 terrorist attack in Mumbai, India that killed nearly two hundred people and injured more than three hundred.  The group’s leader is Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, who is listed under UN Security Council Resolution 1267.

 

**Naz ir Ahmad Chaudhry (Ahmad)**

Ahmad has been an LT senior leader since the early 2000s and has served as LT vice-president, member of the group’s central leadership, and as close aide of LT’s overall leader Muhammad Saeed.  Ahmad directed the group’s public relations department for at least ten years and, as of 2012, was the head of LT’s information wing.  Ahmad has also been a key strategist for the group and has been involved in LT operational finance matters.

 

**Muhammad Hussein Gill**Gill is a senior LT shura member and was an LT founder.  He has been an accountant for LT for more than ten years and more specifically, has served as LT’s chief financial officer and headed LT’s accounts department for several years.  He also has served in LT’s revenue wing and has maintained LT’s expense records.

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons in which Ahmad and Gill have an interest are blocked, and U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.

 

**Identifying Information**Name:                                      Nazir Ahmad Chaudhry

AKA:                                      Nazir Ahmad

AKA:                                      Nazir Ahmed

AKA:                                      Nazeer Ahmed

DOB:                                      12 December 1948

POB:                                       Sahiwal, Punjab Province, Pakistan

Citizenship:                             Pakistan

National ID Number:              3520162456585, Pakistan

Alt. National ID Number:       22058321812, Pakistan

Passport:                                  BE4196581 (Pakistan), Issued 1 December 2007, Expired 29 November 2012

 

Name:                                      Muhammad Hussein Gill

AKA:                                      Muhammad Hussain Gill

AKA:                                      Abdul Wafa

AKA:                                      Abu ul-Wafa

AKA:                                      Yahya Abu al Wafa

DOB:                                      7 April 1937

Address:                                  4-Lake Road, Lahore, Pakistan

Nationality:                             Pakistan

National ID Number:              35202-8457000-3

 

###

​
