---
title: Remarks of Deputy Secretary Raskin at a Public Outreach Meeting of the Treasury Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization
date: 2015-05-06
draft: false
press_release_number: JL10046
url: /news/press-releases/jl10046
---
*(Archived Content)*

**​​As delivered** 
**WASHINGTON **- Thank you Jose for organizing this gathering.  Jose Arrieta is a visionary at the United States Treasury Department, and our country is fortunate to have him at the helm of Treasury’s Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization.  Jose, your dedication, enthusiasm, and leadership all align in support of the Office’s crucial mission.  This event is yet another example of your tremendous vision.   
Good morning to you all; it’s terrific to see you here, and I’d like to welcome you to the Cash Room at the Treasury Department.   This event was planned in conjunction with National Small Business Week, a worthy and important tribute established by President John F. Kennedy in 1963.  But it strikes me, that as far as our national economy is concerned, every week is Small Business Week.  Your businesses are a vital part of our nation. Small businesses are the economy’s backbone, and the source of our country’s innovation, global competitiveness, and growth.  Your work comprises the best traits underlying American prosperity: ingenuity, perseverance, and ceaseless determination to identify consumer demand and create business models that, when marketed and scaled, meet this demand.  
There are approximately 28 million small businesses in the U.S., and they create nearly two-thirds of all new jobs in our country.  When these businesses are positioned to succeed, our economy and country are positioned to succeed.  This is why it’s critical to make sure that the underlying foundations and resources necessary to support business are intact and optimal.  In other words, we want to enhance opportunities for small businesses and to confront and address the challenges that our small businesses face.   
Today you’ll participate in conversations that probe these foundations and resources with an eye towards optimizing small business success, and you’ll do so with a particular focus on navigating the federal contracting market.  According to the Small Business Administration, the U.S. government is the world’s largest single purchaser of goods and services.  And as this audience surely knows—I say that given the broad range of business leaders and people from across the agency and bureaus I recognize who are here today—this means there is tremendous expertise in this room ready, willing, and able to determine how we maximize the potential for small businesses to work with the federal government.   
To optimize our time together today, panelists and speakers will discuss how to reinvest your profits in people, process, and infrastructure; how to monitor and take advantage of market trends; and how to identify business opportunities with the government before they are posted.  We want to encourage thoughtful conversation and debate.  And we hope that delving into each of these topics encourages you to look at your operations strategically, poised for the long-term, and to internalize and apply the lessons and best practices highlighted.   
Our collective goal is to create a forum of experienced people who can offer invaluable insight for developing sustainable strategies to expand your businesses by tailoring your operations to the contours of federal government contracting.  But this will also be an opportunity for us to learn from you.  After today I urge you to stay engaged with the people you meet here.  This event is meant only as a springboard for ideas and tactics, so use it to keep the conversation moving even after today.  
I hope you enjoy the program.  Thank you all, again, for your continued hard work and leadership, and for engaging with us on this important topic.  
###
