---
title: Treasury Targets a Key Mexican Narcotics Trafficker and his Prominent Scaffolding Company
date: 2015-02-17
draft: false
press_release_number: JL9775
url: /news/press-releases/jl9775
---
*(Archived Content)*

​**Action Further Exposes Cesar Gastelum Serrano’s Criminal & Financial Network**   **WASHINGTON –** The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated Mexican national Francisco Javier Gastelum Serrano, and Mexico City-based scaffolding company, Andamios Dalmine SA, as Specially Designated Narcotics Traffickers pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act).  Francisco Javier is President of Andamios Dalmine.  This action follows the December 2014 designation of Sinaloa Cartel member Cesar Gastelum Serrano and three of Cesar Gastelum Serrano’s brothers: Alfredo, Jaime, and Guadalupe Candelario Gastelum Serrano.  Francisco Javier is the fifth brother in the Gastelum Serrano drug trafficking network to be designated by the Treasury Department.  As a result of today’s action, all assets of those designated that are based in the United States or in the control of U.S. persons are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.   “With today’s action against Francisco Javier and his scaffolding company, we are once again targeting the Gastelum Serrano network, a powerful cocaine trafficking organization responsible for supporting Mexico’s Sinaloa Cartel,” said John E. Smith, Acting Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC).  “This underscores our relentless efforts to undermine violent drug networks and those that support their efforts.”   Francisco Javier provides critical support to the drug trafficking activities of his brother, Cesar.  Cesar is a prominent distributor of cocaine in Central America for Mexico’s Sinaloa Cartel who uses a vast criminal network to lead a cocaine trafficking organization capable of moving tons of cocaine per week through Honduras and Guatemala to Mexico.  In addition to supervising shipments of narcotics, Francisco Javier has been responsible for handling drug money pickups on behalf of his brothers.    Andamios Dalmine is a large Mexico City-based scaffolding company with thirteen regional offices throughout Mexico.  The company’s warehouses have been used to store narcotics.  Francisco Javier has been President of Andamios Dalmine since 2004 and appears as the legal guardian on an Andamios Dalmine scaffolding service contract with the state of Jalisco.   Today’s action would not have been possible without the support of the Drug Enforcement Administration and the government of Mexico.   Since June 2000, more than 1,700 entities and individuals have been named pursuant to the Kingpin Act for their role in international narcotics trafficking.  Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties.  Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines up to $5 million.  Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million.  Other individuals could face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.   To see a chart relating to today’s action, click [*here.*](http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/gastelum_serrano_022015.pdf)* * For a complete listing of designations pursuant to the Kingpin Act, click [*here*](http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/narco_designations_kingpin.pdf)*.*     ###
