---
title: ​Remarks of Secretary Lew Before Meeting with Chinese Vice Premier Wang Yang
date: 2015-03-30
draft: false
press_release_number: JL10011
url: /news/press-releases/jl10011
---
*(Archived Content)*

  As Prepared for Delivery
BEIJING – Thank you, Vice Premier Wang, for your hospitality in hosting me here today.
Vice Premier Wang and I have become friends as we have worked together over the past two years to deepen our economic cooperation and ensure this relationship is one that benefits citizens of both of our countries.
It is in this spirit that we look ahead to this summer’s meeting of the Strategic and Economic Dialogue, where we will work to make progress on the issues that matter most to us.
Our goal is to continue to make concrete and tangible progress on our respective issues of concern in order to deliver mutual benefits to the United States and China.
Promoting innovation and open markets is in our mutual interest. We have already made clear our concerns regarding forced technology transfer and other attempts to bar technological competition, most recently in the banking sector, and I look forward to further discussion today. 
We must continue our discussions about sustaining growth going forward, both in our countries and the global economy.
We must work to achieve a mutually beneficial bilateral economic relationship, including through a trade and investment relationship that provides a level playing field and supports jobs and growth.
In addition, it is critical that China continue to move to a more market-determined exchange rate and a more transparent exchange rate policy.  
We support China’s efforts to shift towards greater reliance on domestic demand.  And we look forward to working with China as it continues to deepen its financial reforms and becomes more integrated into and assumes greater responsibility in the global financial system.
I look forward to another set of candid and productive discussions on our shared interests and challenges, and to hosting you and your delegation in Washington in a few short months.
# # #
