---
title: Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson on the Meeting between Secretary Lew and Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk and Finance Minister Natalie Jaresko
date: 2015-06-09
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0071
url: /news/press-releases/jl0071
---
*(Archived Content)*

​****  **WASHINGTON - **Secretary Jacob J. Lew met today with Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk and Finance Minister Natalie Jaresko to discuss the situation in Ukraine and underscore the unwavering support of the United States for the Ukrainian people.  He welcomed the efforts by authorities to reach a debt restructuring agreement with creditors that meets the three objectives for the debt operation outlined by the IMF program aimed at achieving a sustainable fiscal and growth path.  He noted that the IMF program required shared sacrifices from all stakeholders to secure the economic recovery that is in the interest of all parties.  Secretary Lew praised the Ukrainian government’s strong reform efforts to restore growth and stability amid extraordinary circumstances, and underscored the importance of continued implementation of the reform agenda.    In addition, Secretary Lew congratulated the authorities on successfully issuing $1 billion in U.S. guaranteed debt at the end of May.  He emphasized the continued commitment of the United States and the international community to provide Ukraine with the financial support it needs as it undertakes necessary reforms and lays the groundwork for economic growth.     Secretary Lew also noted the continued desire of the United States to see a negotiated political solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine that respects Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.  He affirmed that the United States continues to work with its international partners to support full implementation of the Minsk agreements.  He highlighted agreement at the G-7 Summit to maintain current sanctions until Russia has fully complied with its Minsk commitments, and noted that the United States and our G-7 allies stand ready to impose significant additional sanctions on Russia if needed to respond to its aggressive acts in eastern Ukraine.   ###
