---
title: Treasury Sanctions Major Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant Leaders, Financial Figures, Facilitators, and Supporters
date: 2015-09-29
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0188
url: /news/press-releases/jl0188
---
*(Archived Content)*

*​*** *Coordinated Treasury, State, and United Nations Designations in Advance of the Leaders’ Summit on Countering ISIL and Violent Extremism Underscore an International Focus on Defeating ISIL*   **WASHINGTON **– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the designation of 15 key Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) terrorism facilitators pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  These designations focus on attacking ISIL’s finances by inhibiting ISIL's financial leaders and facilitators from using the international financial system, and support President Obama's strategy to disrupt and ultimately destroy ISIL.  The State Department concurrently announced 15 additional ISIL-related designations, and amended the designations of two additional groups, under E.O. 13224.  Demonstrating international resolve to counter ISIL, the United Nations (UN) today also added many of these domestic ISIL designations to the UN al-Qaida Sanctions List.  These designations precede the Leaders' Summit on Countering ISIL and Violent Extremism to be held later today on the margins of the UN General Assembly meetings, and which will bring together leaders from more than 100 countries, 15 multilateral bodies, and 120 civil society and private sector organizations to review progress on and announce initiatives to counter ISIL, the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, and violent extremism.     As a result of today’s actions, any property or interest in property of the individuals and entities designated by Treasury or State within U.S. jurisdiction is frozen.  Additionally, transactions by U.S. persons involving the designated individuals and entities are generally prohibited.    “Treasury remains relentless about depleting ISIL’s financial strength and denying this violent terrorist group access to the international financial system,” said Adam J. Szubin, Acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.  “We will continue to hinder ISIL’s ability to gain, move, and use funds, and will work closely with our partners across the U.S. government and the international community to destroy this brutal organization.”    Treasury designated domestically the following ISIL officials and facilitators: Hasan al-Salahayn Salih al-Sha'ari, Ali Musa al-Shawakh, Tarad Mohammad Aljarba, Morad Laaboudi, Mu'tassim Yahya 'Ali al-Rumaysh, Mounir Ben Dhaou Ben Brahim Ben Helal, Sami Jasim Muhammad al-Jaburi, Tuah Febriwansyah, Muhammad Sholeh Ibrahim, Nasir Muhammad 'Awad al-Ghidani al-Harbi, Hafiz Saeed Khan, Muwaffaq Mustafa Muhammad al-Karmush, Bajro Ikanovic, Aqsa Mahmood and Omar Hussain.  Several of these individuals were also included today on the UN al-Qaida Sanctions List, with co-sponsorship at the UN from several countries, including Italy and the United Kingdom.  Consequently, all member states of the United Nations are obligated to deny these individuals access to the international financial system and prohibit any travel.    The designations announced today also support the efforts of the Counter ISIL Finance Group (CIFG), which was formed in March 2015 in Rome and is co-led by Italy, Saudi Arabia, and the United States.  The CIFG, which focuses on disrupting the financial and economic activities of ISIL, is one of five working groups that were established by the Coalition to Counter ISIL.  The CIFG seeks to prevent ISIL’s use of the international financial system; counter ISIL’s extortion and exploitation of economic assets; deny ISIL funding from abroad; and prevent ISIL from providing financial or material support to its foreign affiliates.  The third CIFG meeting is scheduled to take place in Washington, DC on October 6 and 7, 2015.     **Hasan al-Salahayn Salih al-Sha'ari (al-Sha'ari)**   Salih al-Sha'ari is being designated for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial or other services to or in support of, ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   Libyan national al-Sha'ari is an ISIL facilitator who has previously been associated with the group's predecessor, the U.S. and UN-designated al-Qaida in Iraq.  Now-deceased former AQI leader Abu Mus'ab al-Zarqawi trained al-Sha'ari.  In mid-2012, al-Sha'ari was released from an Iraqi prison and returned to Libya, where he continued to support ISIL, subsequently starting a branch of ISIL in late 2014.  From late 2012, al-Sha'ari provided hundreds of thousands of dollars to several individuals, including senior ISIL member and Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) Tariq Bin al-Tahar Bin al Falih al-‘Awni al-Harzi (AKA Tariq Abu Umar al-Tunisi), and provided experienced, trusted personnel to aid al-Harzi.  By early 2014, al-Sha'ari and other associates had sworn themselves to ISIL and in the fall of 2014 he led ISIL convoys in Darnah, Libya.   **Ali Musa al-Shawakh (al-Shawakh)**   Al-Shawakh is being designated for acting for or on behalf of ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   As of mid-2015, Syrian national al-Shawakh served as ISIL’s governor for Raqqah, Syria, after previously serving as ISIL’s senior security official for Syria and as governor in Aleppo, roles in which he directed combat assignments for foreign fighters.   Al-Shawakh was in charge of ISIL’s detention of foreign hostages, and oversaw the appointment of other ISIL leaders.  Al-Shawakh supervised security matters, including executions, interrogations, and transfers of ISIL prisoners, at an al-Raqqah detention facility used to hold foreign hostages and ISIL foreign recruits who had refused to fight.  In mid-2014, al-Shawakh ordered the beheadings of two ISIL hostages.  Al-Shawakh also served on a governance council chaired by ISIL leader and U.S. and UN-designated SDGT Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi (AKA Dr. Ibrahim al-Badri).   **Tarad Mohammad Aljarba (Aljarba)  **   Aljarba is being designated for acting for or on behalf of ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   As of April 2015, Saudi Arabian national Aljarba was ISIL's senior Syria-Turkey border and logistics official.  In 2014, Aljarba facilitated the travel from Turkey to Syria of prospective ISIL fighters from Australia, Europe, and the Middle East and managed ISIL's processing center for new recruits in Azaz, Syria.  As of mid-2014, Aljarba was also ISIL's leader for operations outside of Syria and Iraq.  He facilitated the travel to Syria of several European ISIL members in 2013.     **Morad Laaboudi (Laaboudi)**   Laaboudi is being designated for acting for or on behalf of ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   Moroccan national Laaboudi is an ISIL-affiliated extremist, and as of early 2015, a Gaziantep, Turkey-based travel facilitator for ISIL, assisting fighters in crossing the Turkish-Syrian border into Syria.   **Mu'tassim Yahya 'Ali al-Rumaysh (al-Rumaysh)**   Al-Rumaysh is being designated for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial or other services to or in support of, ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   Yemeni national al-Rumaysh is a financial and foreign fighter facilitator for ISIL who also has held membership in al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP).  Al-Rumaysh also helped an ISIL member procure funds for the travel of foreign fighters from Yemen to Syria transiting Turkey.  As of December 2013, al-Rumaysh coordinated with SDGT entities AQAP and Al-Nusrah Front to facilitate the travel of ISIL members.  In November 2013, al-Rumaysh sent a group of Yemeni extremists to Turkey to U.S.-designated SDGT and UN Security Council Resolution 1267 designee Maysar Ali Musa Abdallah al-Juburi, who brought them to an AQAP facilitator in Syria.      **Mounir Ben Dhaou Ben Brahim Ben Helal (Helal)**   Helal is being designated for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial or other services to or in support of, ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, and for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial or other services to or in support of, AQIM, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   Tunisian national Helal facilitates the travel and activities of foreign terrorist fighters, utilizing his experience in establishing and securing travel routes.  As of late 2012, Helal was involved in a Tunisia-based terrorist facilitation network that recruited and transported volunteers to Syria, and supplied arms to U.S. designated SDGT al-Qaida in the Lands of the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM).  Helal has provided material support to AQIM in North Africa and worked to assist foreign terrorist fighters' travel throughout North Africa to Syria to join ISIL.   **Aqsa Mahmood (Mahmood)**   Mahmood is being designated for acting for or on behalf of ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   United Kingdom national Mahmood is an ISIL recruiter and member of an ISIL all-female police unit, who as of 2015, used social media to lure foreigners, especially Western women, to travel to Syria and join ISIL.  In February 2015, Mahmood helped recruit three UK minors to travel to Syria, where they joined ISIL.  At least one of the three minors had been in direct contact with Mahmood via social media in the days prior to their departure.  As an ISIL recruiter, Mahmood posts practical information and advice to young women interested in joining ISIL on her blog.  In blog posts, Mahmood has described the benefits of living under ISIL and urged individuals in the West to travel to Syria before it became difficult, among other topics.     In addition to recruiting for ISIL, as of September 2014, Mahmood served in the al-Khansaa Brigade, an all-female ISIL police unit enforcing the ultra-strict brand of sharia law imposed by ISIL in Raqqa, Syria.  As of August 2014, Mahmood received a monthly salary for her role as an enforcer in the al-Khansaa Brigade, which imposes beatings, lashings, and executions for infractions of ISIL’s laws and manages ISIL’s brothels of Yazidi sex slaves in Raqqa, Syria.     **Omar Hussain (Hussain)**   Hussain is being designated for acting for or on behalf of ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   As of September 2015, UK national Hussain (AKA Abu Sa’eed al-Britani) was considered to be one of ISIL’s most prominent recruiters.  As an ISIL fighter, he offered tips on evading British security to individuals interested in leaving the United Kingdom to fight with ISIL.  In July 2015, Hussain confirmed that he had joined ISIL and was in Aleppo Province, Syria.  Via his blog, he provided guidance about traveling to Syria to fight with ISIL and described alternate occupations to support the group for those unable to fight.   **Sami Jasim Muhammad al-Jaburi (al-Jaburi)**   Muhammad al-Jaburi is being designated for acting for or on behalf of ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, and providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial or other services to or in support of, ISIL.   As of March 2015, Iraqi national al-Jaburi supervised ISIL’s oil and gas, antiquities, and mineral resources operations.  In April 2015, al-Jaburi and now-deceased ISIL oil and gas official Fathi ben Awn ben Jildi Murad al-Tunisi (AKA Abu Sayyaf) worked to establish a new funding stream for ISIL from increased production at oil fields held by the organization.  In August of 2014, al-Jaburi was ISIL’s shari’a council chief and second in command in southern Mosul, Iraq.     **Tuah Febriwansyah (Febriwansyah)**   Febriwansyah is being designated for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial or other services to or in support of, ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   Indonesian national Febriwansyah is the leader of an Indonesia-based ISIL-aligned organization and has provided support to ISIL in the areas of recruitment, fundraising, and travel.  The organization led by Febriwansyah has publicly sworn allegiance to ISIL.   On March 21, 2015, Indonesian police arrested Febriwansyah and five other Indonesian citizens for recruiting and funding Indonesians to travel to Syria and Iraq to fight for ISIL.  Febriwansyah and his accomplices were accused by Indonesian police of facilitating travel for as many as 37 Indonesians on behalf of ISIL.  Indonesian police charged Febriwansyah with terrorism offenses, including funding terrorism and violating the country’s “Information and Electronic Transactions Law.”     As of mid-2014, Jemmah Anshorut Tauhid (JAT) leaders sought Febriwansyah’s support to bolster JAT during a schism over allegiance to ISIL.  JAT, which seeks the establishment of an Islamic caliphate in Indonesia, and has carried out numerous and deadly attacks against Indonesian government personnel, police, military, and civilians, was designated an FTO and SDGT on February 23, 2012.   **Muhammad Sholeh Ibrahim (Ibrahim)**   Ibrahim is being designated for acting for or on behalf of JAT, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   Indonesian national Ibrahim has served as the acting emir of JAT since 2014.  Ibrahim has supported ISIL and swore allegiance to the group in 2014.  Ibrahim has also been involved in raising funds for JAT.  As of 2014, Ibrahim served as a leader of JAT’s Solo (or Surakarta), Indonesia office.  He previously was responsible for the JAT Solo office's planning and strategy.   In mid-2011, Ibrahim organized buses to transport JAT supporters from Central Java to Jakarta for the trial of JAT founder Abu Bakar Ba’asyir, designated as an SDGT in April 2006.  Additionally, Ibrahim was involved in registering new JAT paramilitary recruits in 2010 and took part in JAT paramilitary training in 2008.   **Nasir Muhammad 'Awad al-Ghidani al-Harbi (al-Harbi)**   Al-Harbi is being designated for acting for or on behalf of ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   In mid-2015, Saudi Arabian national al-Harbi, an ISIL leader in Yemen, allegedly recruited for ISIL's military forces in Yemen.  Around 2014, al-Harbi received funding to implement ISIL's strategy in Yemen.  In late 2014, al-Harbi, the self-proclaimed ISIL leader in Yemen, facilitated the movement of people and material for ISIL operations in Saudi Arabia.  He was in Yemen with a group that pledged allegiance to ISIL and received significant funding from either ISIL or an unidentified donor.  As of September 2014, al-Harbi and others established contact with ISIL, and sought pledges of allegiance on ISIL's behalf.  Al-Harbi was commissioned by ISIL in Syria to gather pledges of allegiance in Yemen.  He declined to recruit and facilitate efforts in Yemen on behalf of AQAP in favor of an alleged promise of 4,000 AQIM fighters by U.S. and UN-designated SDGT and ISIL leader Dr. Ibrahim al-Badri (AKA Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi).  As of 2014, al-Harbi had provided funds to ISIL.   **Hafiz Saeed Khan (Khan)**   Khan is being designated for acting for or on behalf of ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   As of early 2015, ISIL leader al-Badri (AKA al-Baghdadi) appointed Pakistani national Khan as the emir of ISIL in the Khorasan (ISIL-K), the organization’s branch in Afghanistan and Pakistan.  Khan was recruited to ISIL by al-Badri and pledged allegiance to him in October 2014.     Khan, as leader of ISIL-K, plays a central role in expanding ISIL’s operations in the region, commanding militants and coordinating the delivery of supplies and munitions, the travel of associates, and other arrangements.  In mid-2015, Khan appointed ISIL representatives in Kunar Province and Nangarhar Province, Afghanistan and approved funding for the establishment of a training camp for ISIL fighters in western Afghanistan. ISIL militants under Khan’s command had taken control of several districts in Nangarhar Province in mid-2015.  Khan in early 2015 claimed ISIL was responsible for the April 18, 2015 suicide attacks in Jalalabad City, Nangarhar Province which killed approximately 33 people.  Khan formerly served as a senior commander in Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan, an SDGT designated by the U.S. government in September 2010.   **Muwaffaq Mustafa Muhammad al-Karmush (al-Karmush)**   Al-Karmush is being designated for acting for or on behalf of ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   As of December 2014, al-Karmush supervised ISIL's financial affairs, including salary payments.  He previously oversaw ISIL’s military financial affairs and served as one of AQI’s financial chiefs.   **Bajro Ikanovic (Ikanovic)  **   Ikanovic is being designated for acting for or on behalf of ISIL, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.   Bosnian national Ikanovic has held various leadership positions within ISIL in Iraq and Syria over the past several years, including on ISIL’s Shura Council in 2014.  In December 2013, ISIL commander and SDGT Tarkhan Teymurazovich Batirashvili (AKA Abu Omar al-Shishani) promoted Ikanovic to head of the largest ISIL training camp in northern Syria.     For the identifying information regarding today’s action, click *here​*.   ###
