---
title: Treasury Sanctions Hizballah Procurement Agents and Their Companies
date: 2015-11-05T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0255
url: /news/press-releases/jl0255
---
*(Archived Content)* *Action Targets Hizballah Procurement in Support of Military Capabilities and Acts of Terrorism*   **WASHINGTON** – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury targeted significant Hizballah procurement facilitators responsible for providing material support to enhance the group’s military and terrorist capabilities.  As part of today’s action, Treasury designated Hizballah procurement agent Fadi Hussein Serhan, his company Vatech SARL, as well as Hizballah procurement agent Adel Mohamad Cherri and his company Le-Hua Electronics Field Co. Limited.  Treasury also designated two companies owned or controlled by Specially Designated Global Terrorist and Hizballah procurement agent Ali Zeaiter.  Treasury’s action against these two individuals and four companies were taken pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  As a result of today’s action, all assets of these individuals and companies that are under the jurisdiction of the United States or in the control of U.S. persons are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.   Today’s action continues Treasury’s ongoing efforts to target Hizballah and its supporters under E.O. 13224, which have recently included actions against a key Hizballah financial support network in Lebanon and Iraq, among numerous other designations.    “Hizballah is a dangerous, destabilizing terrorist group, and Treasury is determined to maintain maximum pressure on this organization by targeting its many revenue streams,” said Adam J. Szubin, Acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.  “Today’s action highlights Hizballah’s exploitation of the commercial sector to support its military capabilities and facilitate acts of terrorism.  Treasury will pursue any individual or company providing support for this violent group.”**Fadi Hussein Serhan and Vatech SARL** Fadi Hussein Serhan is being designated today for providing services to Hizballah.  Vatech SARL is being designated for being owned or controlled by Fadi Hussein Serhan.   Serhan is a Hizballah procurement agent and General Manager of Beirut-based company Vatech SARL, which he has used to purchase sensitive technology and equipment for Hizballah.  Serhan has purchased unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and accessories, and various electronic equipment from companies in United States, Europe, Asia, and the Middle East.**Adel Mohamad Cherri and Le-Hua Electronic Field Co.**   Adel Mohamad Cherri is being designated today for providing services to Hizballah.  Le-Hua Electronic Field Co. Limited is being designated for being owned or controlled by Adel Mohamad Cherri.   Cherri is a Hizballah procurement agent who has purchased dual-use technology and equipment from suppliers in Asia on behalf of Hizballah.  Cherri has also facilitated Hizballah’s efforts to procure a variety of electronics from China for transport to Yemen for use in improvised explosive devices by the Houthis, a group that has engaged in acts that directly or indirectly threaten the peace, security, or stability of Yemen.     Le-Hua Electronic Field Co. Limited is a China-based company controlled by Adel Mohamad Cherri.**Aero Skyone Co. Limited and Labico SAL Offshore** Aero Skyone Co. Limited and Labico SAL Offshore are being designated today for being owned or controlled by Ali Zeaiter.     Aero Skyone Co. Limited is a China-based front company created in 2013 and controlled by Hizballah procurement agent Ali Zeaiter. Zeaiter has used Aero Skyone Co. Limited. to procure engines and other UAV equipment from Europe and Asia for Hizballah.  Labico SAL Offshore is a Lebanon-based company owned by designated Hizballah procurement agent Ali Zeaiter.   Treasury designated Ali Zeaiter in July 2014 pursuant to E.O. 13224 for using the China-based subsidiary of Stars Group Holding, Stars International Ltd., to acquire a range of communications, electronics, and navigation equipment for Hizballah’s use in UAVs and other projects.  Zeaiter relied on false end-user certificates, mislabeled air waybills, and other fraudulent methods to avoid export restrictions and otherwise conceal the fact that Hizballah was the ultimate end-user or beneficiary of these goods.   To see the identifying information pertaining to today’s action, click *here*.     ###
