---
title: Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson of Secretary Lew’s Calls with Eurogroup President and Finance Minister of the Netherlands Jeroen Dijsselbloem and Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras
date: 2015-06-22
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0083
url: /news/press-releases/jl0083
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** - Sunday afternoon, U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew spoke by telephone with Eurogroup President and Finance Minister of the Netherlands Jeroen Dijsselbloem.  Secretary Lew and Eurogroup President Dijsselbloem discussed the ongoing developments in Greece. Secretary Lew again emphasized the immediate need for Greece to agree to a comprehensive set of reforms.  Secretary Lew also urged Eurogroup President Dijsselbloem to continue all efforts with European partners to support Greece in finding a path to restore growth and sustainable public finances within the euro area.

This morning, Secretary Lew also spoke by telephone with Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras.  Secretary Lew reiterated that the Treasury Department remains engaged with all sides regarding the delicate situation in Greece.  Secretary Lew took note of Greece’s recent reform proposal.  He underscored the urgency of Greece making a serious move to reach a pragmatic compromise with its creditors, and that failure to reach an agreement would create immediate hardship for Greece and uncertainties for Europe and the global economy.  Secretary Lew underscored the need for Greece to present credible proposals that provide the basis for reaching an agreement as quickly as possible, and that European leaders should be ready to do their part in response.
# # #
