---
title: Anne Wall Confirmed as Treasury Deputy Under Secretary for Legislative Affairs
date: 2015-06-25T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0096
url: /news/press-releases/jl0096
---
*(Archived Content)*

  **WASHINGTON** – Anne Wall was confirmed by the United States Senate to serve as the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Deputy Under Secretary for Legislative Affairs. In this position, Wall is responsible for leading Treasury’s engagement with the United States Congress and she will advise Secretary Lew on legislative strategy, communicate Treasury's priorities to Congress, and keep the Department informed of Congressional objectives and concerns.

“Anne has been a dedicated public servant throughout her career, and she is bringing valuable experience to the Treasury Department at a critical time,” said Treasury Secretary Jack Lew.  “Anne has earned the trust and respect of Members of Congress and their staff on both sides of the aisle, and I will rely on her impeccable judgement as we continue to build on the great progress the Administration has made to strengthen our economy and grow the middle class.”

Prior to joining Treasury, Wall served in the White House, most recently as the Deputy Assistant to the President for Legislative Affairs and Senate Liaison and previously as Special Assistant to the President for Legislative Affairs.  Prior to joining the White House, Ms. Wall served in the office of United States Senator and Majority Whip Dick Durbin (D-IL) from 2006 to 2011 holding various positions, including Floor Director and Office Counsel.  From 2004 to 2006, she was a litigation associate at Pretzel & Stouffer in Chicago.  She also served as a Law Clerk for Cook County Circuit Court Judges Allen Goldberg and Lynn Egan.

Ms. Wall received a B.A. from Miami University in Oxford, Ohio and a J.D. from DePaul University in Chicago, Illinois, where she was a member of the Law Review.

 

###

​
