---
title: Treasury Sanctions Hizballah Leaders, Military Officials, And An Associate In Lebanon
date: 2015-07-21
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0121
url: /news/press-releases/jl0121
---
*(Archived Content)*

*Action Targets Individuals for their Efforts Aiding Hizballah's Support for the Assad Regime or for its Global Terrorist Activities*

**WASHINGTON** –The U.S. Department of the Treasury today imposed sanctions against a set of key Hizballah leaders, military officials, and an associate in Lebanon, further exposing and targeting Hizballah's active support to the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and Hizballah's terrorist activities. Today, Treasury designated Mustafa Badr Al Din, Fu'ad Shukr, and Ibrahim Aqil pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13582 for acting for or on behalf of Hizballah. Treasury today also imposed sanctions against Hizballah facilitator Abd Al Nur Shalan pursuant to E.O. 13224 for acting for or on behalf of Hizballah. As a result of today's action, all assets of these four individuals that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.

Today's designations are the latest in a series of actions the U.S. government is taking against Hizballah for its violent terrorist activities and its support to the Assad regime's attacks against the Syrian people. Treasury's most recent related action took place in June 2015 with the designation of Hizballah front companies and facilitators.

As these designations make clear, the United States will continue to aggressively target Hizballah for its terrorist activities worldwide as well as its ongoing support to Assad's ruthless military campaign in Syria, said Adam J. Szubin, Acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence. We will pursue all of Hizballah's revenue sources, whether charitable fundraising, criminal proceeds, or state sponsorship.

Hizballah was designated for its support to the Government of Syria pursuant to E.O. 13582 in August 2012. It was also named a Specially Designated Global Terrorist pursuant to E.O. 13224 in October 2001, and listed in the Annex to E.O. 12947 as a Specially Designated Terrorist in January 1995. In addition, Mustafa Badr Al Din was designated as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist pursuant to E.O. 13224 on September 13, 2012.

Hizballah began providing military support, including training, advice, and extensive logistical aid, to the Assad regime and pro-regime militias at the start of the Syrian conflict in early 2011. Hizballah has coordinated its military support with senior officials in the Assad regime. Under the direction of Hizballah Secretary-General Hasan Nasrallah, Hizballah escalated its military aid to the Government of Syria in mid-2012.

***Mustafa Badr Al Din***

Badr Al Din is assessed to be responsible for Hizballah's military operations in Syria since 2011, including the movement of Hizballah fighters from Lebanon to Syria, in support of the Syrian regime. Since September 2011, strategic coordination was handled between Assad and Hizballah leader Hassan Nasrallah on a weekly basis, with Badr Al Din accompanying Nasrallah during the meetings in Damascus. Since 2012, Badr Al Din coordinated Hizballah military activities in Syria. Badr Al Din led Hizballah ground offensives in the Syrian town of al-Qusayr in February 2013, and in May 2013 the Free Syrian Army (FSA) confirmed that Badr Al Din was leading Hizballah's operations in al-Qusayr.

***Ibrahim Aqil***

Aqil serves on Hizballah's highest military body, the Jihad Council, and has played a vital role in Hizballah's military campaign in Syria by aiding Hizballah fighters and pro-Syrian regime troops against Syrian opposition forces in battles inside Syria. In addition, Aqil has been the subject of multiple Interpol Red Notices, which document his long history with Hizballah, including his involvement in the hostage taking of two Germans in the late 1980s and a bombing campaign in Paris in 1986.

***Fu'ad Shukr***

Shukr serves on Hizballah's highest military body, the Jihad Council, and has played a vital role in Hizballah's military campaign in Syria by aiding Hizballah fighters and pro-Syrian regime troops against Syrian opposition forces in decisive battles inside Syria.

***Abd Al Nur Shalan***

Shalan, a businessman with close ties to Hizballah leadership, has been Hizballah's point person for the procurement and transshipment of weapons and materiel for the group and its Syrian partners for at least 15 years. Shalan has been critical in keeping Hizballah supplied with weapons, including small arms, since the start of the Syrian conflict. Shalan ensures items purchased for Hizballah personnel in Syria make it through customs. In 2014, Shalan used his business cover to hide weapons-related materiel in Syria for Hizballah.

In 2012, Shalan was involved in helping Hizballah obtain weapons and equipment and in shipping the materiel to Syria. In 2010, Shalan was at the center of brokering a business deal involving Hizballah, Syrian officials, and companies in Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine regarding the purchase and sale of weapons. Further in 2010, he acquired a number of tons of anhydride, used in the production of explosives and narcotics, for use by Hizballah. In November 2009, Shalan coordinated with Hizballah and Syrian officials on the purchase and delivery of thousands of rifles to Syria.

For identifying information on the individuals and entities designated today, click[*here.*]( http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20150721.aspx)

###
