---
title: Treasury Announces Marketable Borrowing Estimates
date: 2015-08-03T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0139
url: /news/press-releases/jl0139
---
*(Archived Content)*

​
*​View the Sources and Uses Table *[*here*](http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/quarterly-refunding/Documents/Financing-Estimates-August-2015.pdf).    **WASHINGTON  --** The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced its current estimates of net marketable borrowing for the July – September 2015 and October – December 2015 quarters:  
- During the July – September 2015 quarter, Treasury expects to issue $127 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-September cash balance of $225 billion.  This borrowing estimate is $61 billion higher than announced in May 2015.  The increase in borrowing relates primarily to the increase in the end-of-quarter cash balance assumption as well as a modest increase in financing needs.

- During the October – December 2015 quarter, Treasury expects to borrow $270 billion in net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-December cash balance of $275 billion.
During the April – June 2015 quarter, Treasury issued $57 billion in net marketable debt and ended the quarter with a cash balance of $254 billion.  In May 2015, Treasury estimated $59 billion in net marketable debt and assumed an end-of-June cash balance of $260 billion.  The modest decrease in borrowing was driven by a combination of a lower ending cash balance and a decrease in financing needs.    Additional financing details relating to Treasury’s Quarterly Refunding will be released at 8:30 a.m. on Wednesday, August 5, 2015.    ###  

___________________

 

[1]

               

​

 ​
