---
title: Treasury Sanctions Senior Boko Haram Leaders
date: 2015-12-01
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0290
url: /news/press-releases/jl0290
---
*(Archived Content)*

*Action Targets Two Individuals Responsible for Facilitating Terrorism and Violence*

 

**WASHINGTON **- The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the designation of two senior Boko Haram leaders, Mohammed Nur and Mustapha Chad, pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  These designations support the U.S. strategy to counter Boko Haram, which was designated by the Department of State in November 2013 as a Foreign Terrorist Organization and a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT).  In March 2015, Boko Haram pledged allegiance to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).  As a result of today’s actions, all assets of these individuals that are under the jurisdiction of the United States or in the control of U.S. persons are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.

"From kidnapping schoolgirls to mass fatality terrorist attacks, Boko Haram represents a threat not just to innocents in Nigeria but to all civilized society,” said Acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Adam J. Szubin.  “We will continue our efforts to target groups like Boko Haram and all who support them."

**Mohammed Nur (Nur)**

Mohammed Nur is being designated for acting for or on behalf of Boko Haram, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.

Nigerian national Nur is a senior Boko Haram member who supports Boko Haram’s campaign of violence against the government of Nigeria and helped organize the August 26, 2011 suicide attack on the United Nations headquarters in Abuja, Nigeria using vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices (IEDs).  Nur was formerly Boko Haram’s third in command under its then leader, Muhammad Yusuf.

As of July 2013, Nur was a Boko Haram commander who represented the group in negotiations with the Nigerian government.  As of late April 2012, Nur distributed money to at least two Boko Haram suicide bombers for unspecified attacks.  As of early 2012, Mohammed Nur was a member of the Boko Haram leadership council and supervised Boko Haram operations, including suicide bombings, direct attacks, assassinations, and construction of IEDs.

As of late January 2011, Nur was considered a most trusted lieutenant to U.S.-designated Boko Haram leader Abubakar Muhammad Shekau and was one of approximately 90 extremists who had reportedly trained with U.S.-designated SDGT al-Shabaab.  Nur coordinated Boko Haram operations with SDGT al-Qaida in the Lands of the Islamic Maghreb.  Nur was among a group of Boko Haram members arrested in early November 2011 who escaped from prison shortly after being detained when fellow Boko Haram members attacked the prison.

In 2010, Nur was Boko Haram’s coordinator for the group’s training site in Cameroon.  In 2009, some Boko Haram members, including Nur, fled Nigeria into nearby countries to plan reprisal attacks against the Nigerian government.

**Mustapha Chad (Chad)**

Mustapha Chad is being designated for acting for or on behalf of Boko Haram, an entity designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, and for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial or other services to or in support of, Boko Haram.

Chadian national Chad, a Boko Haram Shura Council member and militant commander, in 2013 directed activities in the Yobe State in northern Nigeria, one of five geographic areas in which Boko Haram operated.  Chad also spearheaded a 2013 Boko Haram offensive with 2,000 fighters to take over Maiduguri, Nigeria.  As of September 2013, Chad had provided support to Boko Haram elements operating in northwest Nigeria and maintained several weapons caches for Boko Haram in southeast Niger.  As of 2013, the Boko Haram Shura Council promoted Chad to replace recently deceased Boko Haram commander Babagana al-Salafi.

For identifying information regarding today’s action, click[*here*](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20151201.aspx).

 

###
