---
title: ​Remarks of Secretary Lew before Meeting with Premier Li Keqiang
date: 2015-03-30
draft: false
press_release_number: JL10012
url: /news/press-releases/jl10012
---
*(Archived Content)*

  As Prepared for Delivery 
BEIJING – Mr. Premier, thank you for receiving us.  President Obama sends his warm regards, and is looking forward to hosting President Xi in September.  We have a good opportunity this year to strengthen and deepen economic relations between the United States and China. 
Each of our countries has a large stake in the success of the other.  As the world’s two largest economies, this is a matter of great importance not only to the prosperity of our own peoples, but to the health and development of the global economy.  China has an important role to play in the global economic order, and we should be partners in promoting strong, inclusive, and balanced growth. 
The United States welcomes the reforms that China is undertaking, many of which align with our economic goals.  As part of these reforms, it is critical that China continue to move to a more market-determined exchange rate and a more transparent exchange rate policy.   
In addition, as you move the Chinese economy toward domestic consumption-led growth and reform the financial sector, there are many areas in which open markets and greater participation by American firms in China’s economy can help ensure the success of these reforms. 
During this economic transformation, we must continue our bilateral efforts to break down barriers to bilateral trade and investment that keep our economic relationship from achieving its full potential for the people in our two nations. 
I look forward to working with Vice Premier Wang in this year’s Strategic and Economic Dialogue to make progress on many important issues and to deliver concrete benefits to our citizens. 
# # #
