---
title: Statement by Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew on reaching Adoption Day under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action Regarding Iran’s Nuclear Program
date: 2015-10-18
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0218
url: /news/press-releases/jl0218
---
*(Archived Content)*

​ Today, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), a historic deal which will cut off all of Iran’s pathways to a nuclear weapon, becomes effective, and all those involved officially begin preparations to fulfill their commitments.   This initial milestone carries global significance.  As Iran begins taking its nuclear-related measures and the United States and our partners prepare to lift nuclear-related sanctions in response, we move one step closer to a successful JCPOA and a more secure international community.   While Adoption Day marks an important milestone, no sanctions are being lifted at this stage, and only the limited relief already provided for under the Joint Plan of Action of November 2013 is in effect.  All other activity that was sanctionable before Adoption Day remains sanctionable today.  Only upon Implementation Day, when international inspectors verify that Iran has completed its nuclear commitments under the JCPOA, will the specified nuclear-related sanctions be lifted.    The United States fully intends to uphold its commitments.  If Iran meets its commitments, we will provide guidance prior to Implementation Day to clearly explain the changes to U.S. sanctions on Iran.  As the Treasury Department and the rest of the U.S. government officially begin preparations, we look forward to working closely with Congress, the international community, and the private sector to ensure a successful JCPOA and an end to the nuclear threat from Iran.     ###
