---
title: Statement from a Treasury Spokesperson on Forms 1095-A
date: 2015-03-20T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL10005
url: /news/press-releases/jl10005
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** -[In light of today’s announcement](http://blog.cms.gov/)—regarding additional incorrect information on certain Marketplace tax statements(Forms 1095-A)—the Department of the Treasury is expanding the relief it[announced previously on February 24,](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jl9981)which will mitigate any harm to tax filers.Any individual who enrolled in qualifying Marketplace coverage, received an incorrect Form 1095-A, and filed his or her tax return based on that form does not need to file an amended tax return.  The IRS will not pursue the collection of any additional taxesfrom these individuals based on updated information in the corrected forms.  This relief applies to tax filers who enrolled through the federally facilitated marketplace or a state-based marketplace.

As before, some individuals may choose to file amended returns.  Treasury intends to provide additional information to help tax filers determine whether they would benefit from filing amended returns.  Individuals also may want to consult with their tax preparers to determine if they would benefit from amending.

Only a small fraction of tax filers received incorrect Forms 1095-A.  Treasury estimates thatin the vast majority of these cases,the impact on an individual’s tax liability will be very small.

We continue to urge individuals who have been notified of errors on their Forms 1095-A and have not yet filed their tax returns to wait to file until they receive corrected forms.

 

Read CMS’s blog[here](http://blog.cms.gov/).

For additional information, read Treasury’s FAQs[here​](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/FAQs-CMS-032015-2.pdf).

###
