---
title: Treasury Sanctions Two Central African Republic Militia Commanders
date: 2015-12-18T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0311
url: /news/press-releases/jl0311
---
*(Archived Content)*

   **​ Action Targets Two Individuals Responsible For Recent Violence in Bangui WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today sanctioned two Central African Republic (CAR) militia commanders, Haroun Gaye and Eugene Ngaikosset, pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13667 for engaging in actions that threaten the peace, security, or stability of the CAR.  Haroun Gaye is also being sanctioned for being a leader of a militia group that threatens the peace, security, or stability of the CAR.  This action complements yesterday’s listing of these individuals by the United Nations (UN) under UN Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 2196.  As a result of today’s actions, all assets of these individuals that are under the jurisdiction of the United States or in the control of U.S. persons are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.   “Today’s action targets two individuals who threaten the stability of the Central African Republic’s Transitional Government and undermine free and fair elections,” said Acting OFAC Director John E. Smith.  “Treasury will continue to work with our international partners to pave a path toward peace and justice for the people of the Central African Republic.”   In September 2015, Gaye and Ngaikosset conspired as part of a larger alliance of convenience between ex-Seleka commanders and anti-Balaka allies of previously sanctioned former CAR President Francois Bozize to orchestrate violence in Bangui.  Gaye and Ngaikosset aimed to overthrow the CAR Transitional Government and create a cycle of retaliatory attacks intended to threaten upcoming elections.  On October 1, 2015 Gaye and Ngaikosset personally met to plan an October 3, 2015 attack in Bangui.** Haroun Gaye ** OFAC designated Haroun Gaye for engaging in, and for being a leader of a group that is likewise engaged in, actions or policies that threaten the peace, security, or stability of the CAR.  Noureddine Adam, who was sanctioned pursuant to E.O. 13667 on May 15, 2014, appointed Gaye to the leadership position of “Rapporteur General” (General Reporter) of the ex-Seleka/Popular Front for the Rebirth of the CAR (FPRC) in late 2014.  In addition, Gaye is the leader of FPRC forces in Bangui and of the so-called “Defense Committees,” which are militias of Bangui’s flashpoint Kilometer Five (KM5) neighborhood that have been among the primary instigators of violence and instability in Bangui since September 2015.  Gaye was involved in encouraging violent protests and clashes starting in late September 2015 as part of the attempted coup d’etat to overthrow the Transitional Government.   In May 2015, Gaye orchestrated a disruption on the final day of the Bangui Forum, a multi-day workshop designed to shape the country’s future and address security, justice, development, and governance issues that was attended by hundreds of CAR leaders.  On June 26, 2015, Gaye disrupted the opening of a voter registration drive in Bangui, forcing the registration drive to shut down.  In August 2015, UN forces attempted to arrest Gaye, but he and his supporters were apparently warned in advance and were ready with heavy weapons to thwart the arrest.  In a seven-hour firefight, Gaye’s men used rocket-propelled grenades and hand grenades against UN troops, killing one UN police officer.** Eugene Ngaikosset ** OFAC designated Eugene Ngaikosset for engaging in actions or policies that threaten the peace, security, or stability of the CAR.  Ngaikosset is an anti-Balaka commander in Bangui and is one of the main perpetrators of the violence in Bangui that erupted in late September and October 2015.  As part of that effort, Ngaikosset and others planned to take over the Presidential Palace.  Ngaikosset also attempted to storm a gendarmerie camp to steal weapons and ammunition on the night of September 27-28, 2015, and he led the forces that surrounded the CAR’s national radio office on the 28th.  On October 8, 2015, the CAR’s Justice Minister announced that Ngaikosset was under investigation for his role in the violence and incitement to civil war, and for posing a threat to the security of the state.  On October 11, 2015, Ngaikosset is believed to have called for anti-Balaka forces under his command to carry out kidnappings of French nationals as well as CAR Transitional Government and UN officials.  Ngaikosset was previously implicated in the assassinations of more than 100 alleged members of the Seleka in 2013.    For identifying information on the individuals designated today, click [here](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20151218.aspx).   ###
