---
title: Treasury Targets Africa-Based Hizballah Support Network
date: 2015-02-26T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL9982
url: /news/press-releases/jl9982
---
*(Archived Content)*​*Action Sanctions Three Hizballah Members and Entities They Own and Control in West Africa*   **WASHINGTON** –The U.S. Department of the Treasury today targeted a key Hizballah support network based in Africa.  Mustapha Fawaz, Fouzi Fawaz, and Abdallah Tahini have been designated pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224 for acting for or on behalf of Hizballah.  Amigo Supermarket Limited, Wonderland Amusement Park and Resort Ltd, and Kafak Enterprises Limited have also been designated pursuant to E.O. 13224 for being owned or controlled by Mustapha Fawaz and Fouzi Fawaz.  Any property or interests in property these individuals or entities may have within U.S. jurisdiction are frozen and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from dealing with them.   Hizballah is a Lebanon-based terrorist group, which is known or suspected to have been involved in numerous terrorist attacks throughout the world.  The Annex to Executive Order 12947 of January 1995 listed Hizballah as a Specially Designated Terrorist (SDT).  The Department of State designated Hizballah as a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) in 1997 and as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) under E.O. 13224 in October 2001.   “As these designations make clear, we will track Hizballah’s illicit activities to all corners of the earth,” said Acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Adam J. Szubin.  “Together with our international partners, we are tirelessly working to dismantle Hizballah’s financial apparatus.  Wherever this terrorist group may seek to raise funds, we will target and expose its activity.”**Mustapha Fawaz**Mustapha Fawaz has been a significant donor to Hizballah and is also a member of Hizballah’s Islamic Jihad Organization (IJO).  In mid-May 2013, the Nigerian State Security Service detained Mustapha Fawaz for his affiliation with Hizballah.  Mustapha Fawaz reportedly confessed the details of Hizballah activities in Nigeria and identified additional names of other Hizballah IJO cell members in Nigeria, as well as a specific property in Kano, Nigeria that was used to support terrorism.   As of mid-September 2003, Mustapha Fawaz solicited donations in Abuja, Nigeria, and helped arrange the transmission of these funds to Hizballah in Lebanon.    Since the 1990s, Mustapha Fawaz has been involved in activities related to communications, surveillance, and reporting for Hizballah.  He communicated with Hizballah in Lebanon by e-mail and reportedly received updates and newsletters regarding Hizballah activities and distributed this information to other Hizballah supporters in Abuja.  He used special surveillance cameras based at Amigo Supermarket to monitor the movements of expatriates, especially Israelis.  He also provided Hizballah with a report of his visit to the U.S. Embassy in Nigeria.**Fouzi Fawaz**Fouzi Fawaz is a member of the Hizballah terrorist cell in Nigeria.  Individuals who were arrested in Nigeria for their involvement with Hizballah claimed Fouzi Fawaz was in possession of heavy weapons and involved in other terrorism-related activities.  Fouzi Fawaz was a Hizballah Foreign Relations Department (FRD) official in Abuja, Nigeria.  The FRD claims to be in charge of “community relations;” but the primary goal of the FRD in Nigeria is to scout recruits for Hizballah’s military units, as well as to create and support Hizballah’s terrorist infrastructure for its operational units in Africa and globally.  In 2008 Fouzi Fawaz coordinated travel for a Hizballah associate.  In 2007, he coordinated travel arrangements and itineraries with other Hizballah Foreign Relations officials in Lagos and Kano, Nigeria.   As of 2013, Nigerian authorities issued an arrest warrant for Fouzi Fawaz following the discovery of a Hizballah weapons cache in the Kano, Nigeria.  Fouzi Fawaz was a resident of Abuja, Nigeria and the brother and business partner of Mustapha Fawaz.**Abdallah Tahini**In May 2013, Abdallah Tahini was also arrested for being a member of the Hizballah terrorist cell in Nigeria and was found to be a Hizballah veteran and long-term fundraiser of the organization.  Tahini underwent Hizballah military training in Lebanon in his youth, and he is now a permanent representative of Hizballah’s FRD in Abuja, Nigeria.  Tahini has also served as the Hizballah representative from Kano, Nigeria to Hizballah Martyrs Foundation annual conference.   As of November 2013, Tahini was an operative in Hizballah’s FRD.  Tahini’s duties in Hizballah’s FRD included organizing Hizballah delegations visiting Nigeria, as well as directing others to collect information for Hizballah on Western targets in Nigeria.**Amigo Supermarket Limited**Amigo Supermarket Limited is a supermarket based in Abuja, Nigeria.  Mustapha Fawaz and Fouzi Fawaz are co-owners of Amigo Supermarket Limited, holding a combined 70% ownership share, and are both listed as a Director.**Wonderland Amusement Park and Resort Ltd**Wonderland Amusement Park and Resort Ltd is an amusement park based in Abuja, Nigeria.  Mustapha Fawaz and Fouzi Fawaz hold a combined interest of 100% of the business shares of this entity, and Mustapha Fawaz is its Managing Director.**Kafak Enterprises Limited**Kafak Enterprises Limited is a holding company operating in Nigeria and Sierra Leone.  Mustapha and Fouzi Fawaz are the Managing Directors of this entity.**Identifier Information Name:                                                 Mustapha Reda Darwish Fawaz**AKA:                                                  Moustafa Reda Darwish-Fawaz AKA:                                                  Mustafa Fawwaz AKA:                                                  Mustapha Fawaz AKA:                                                  Mustapha Rida Darwich Fawaz AKA:                                                  Mostafa Reda Darwich Fawaz AKA:                                                  Mustapha Rhoda Darwich Fawaz AKA:                                                  Moustapha Fawaz AKA:                                                  Mustafa Fawaz AKA:                                                  Mustafa Darwish Fawaz Citizenship 1:                                      Lebanese Citizenship 2:                                      Nigerian Citizenship 3:                                      Sierra Leonean Location:                                             Abuja, Nigeria DOB 1:                                               June 25, 1964 DOB 2:                                               September 10, 1964 POB 1:                                                Jwaya, Lebanon POB 2:                                                Koidu Town, Sierra Leone SSN:                                                    418-15-2837 Passport No. 1:                                    RL 2101602 (Lebanon) Passport No. 2:                                    0168459 (Sierra Leone) Passport No. 3:                                    RL0148105 (Lebanon) Passport No. 4:                                    0257909 (Sierra Leone) Address 1:                                           Flat 4, Blantyre Street, Behind Amigo, Supermarket,                                                             Wuse II, Abuja, Nigeria Address 2:                                           3 Gaya Road in Kano, Nigeria**Name:                                                 Fouzi Reda Darwish-Fawaz**AKA:                                                  Fawzi Reda Fawaz AKA:                                                  Fawzy Fawaz AKA:                                                  Fawzi Fawwaz AKA:                                                  Fowzy Fawaz AKA:                                                  Fawzy Reda Darwish-Fawaz DOB 1:                                               February 12, 1968 DOB 2:                                               March 24, 1973 POB 1:                                                Sierra Leone POB 2:                                                Jwaya, Lebanon Passport No. 1:                                    0258649 (Unknown) Passport No. 2:                                    0107516 (Lebanese) Citizenship 1:                                      Lebanese Citizenship 2:                                      Nigerian Citizenship 3:                                      Sierra Leonean**Name:                                                 Abdallah Asad Tahini**AKA:                                                  Abdallah Thahini AKA:                                                  Ahmad Tahini AKA:                                                  Abdallah As’ad Thini DOB:                                                  June 20, 1965 POB:                                                   Lebanon**Name:                                                 Amigo Supermarket Limited**D.B.A.:                                               Amigo Supermarket Address:                                              1023, Adetokunbo Ademola Crescent, Wuse II,                                                             Abuja, Nigeria**Name:                                                 Wonderland Amusement Park and Resort Ltd**AKA:                                                  Wonderland Amusement Park Address:                                              B1 Kukbawa, Opposite National Stadium, Abuja                                                             FCT, Nigeria**Name:                                                 Kafak Enterprises Limited**Address 1:                                           88B, T/Balewa Road, Kano State, Nigeria Address 2:                                           Sierra Leone     ###
