---
title: U.S. Treasury Launches myRA (my Retirement Account) to Help Bridge America’s Retirement Savings Gap
date: 2015-11-04T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0250
url: /news/press-releases/jl0250
---
*(Archived Content)*

*With pilot concluded, program expands with new funding options* *to make myRA available to more people*   **WASHINGTON** – With millions of Americans lacking adequate retirement savings, the U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the national launch of *my*RA, a simple, safe and affordable new savings option for those who don’t have access to a retirement savings plan at work.  People can get information about *my*RA and sign up for an account at [myRA.gov](http://www.myra.gov/).
“*my*RA is designed to remove common barriers to saving, and give people an easy way to get started,” said U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew. “*my*RA has no fees, no risk of losing money and no minimum balance or contribution requirements. To make saving easier than ever, you can now put savings into my *my*RA directly from your bank account.” 
With the initial pilot phase of the program concluded, *my*RA is now available nationwide with multiple ways for people to start saving:
- ​**Paycheck**. Set up automatic direct deposit contributions to*my*RA through an employer.
- **NEW: Checking or savings account**. Now savers can fund a*my*RA account directly by setting up recurring or one-time contributions from a checking or savings account.
- **NEW: Federal tax refund.** At tax time, direct all or a portion of a federal tax refund to*my*RA.
“*my*RA can give people confidence that they’re taking steps in the right direction, and it can serve as a bridge to other savings options that will carry them the rest of the way,” said Lew. “*my*RA alone will not solve the nation’s retirement savings gap, but it will be an important stepping stone for encouraging and creating a nation of savers.” 
According to a [2015 Federal Reserve Report](http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/2014-report-economic-well-being-us-households-201505.pdf), 31 percent of non-retired people said they have no retirement savings or pension whatsoever. Additionally, a 2013 report by the [National Institute on Retirement Savings](http://www.nirsonline.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=768&Itemid=48) found that the average near-retirement household had only $12,000 in retirement savings. Among workers who do not participate in a 401(k) or other defined contribution plan, 42 percent say it’s because their employer does not offer one. Furthermore, among part-time workers, a 2015 [BLS Economic Release](http://www.bls.gov/news.release/ebs2.t01.htm) found that 62 percent don’t have access to a retirement plan at work.
In his 2014 State of the Union address, President Obama announced that he would direct the Treasury Department to develop *my*RA . Throughout 2014, the Treasury Department developed the framework for the program, including creating a new Treasury savings bond to serve as the underlying investment for these accounts, as well as designating a financial agent to help Treasury administer the accounts and set up a simple way for savers to fund their accounts through their employers. This year, the Treasury Department worked with a small, diverse group of employers as part of the initial pilot phase of *my*RA to get feedback and ensure that the user experience is as simple and straightforward as possible.
*my*RA is designed as a starter retirement account to help bridge the savings gap for many of these workers. It is optimized to appeal to first-time savers, for whom a no-risk, principal-protected investment is more appealing than a higher-risk investment option.   As *my*RA account holders grow their savings, they have the option to transfer to a private-sector Roth IRA with diverse investment options at any time, or transfer to a private-sector Roth IRA once they reach the maximum *my*RA balance of $15,000.
*my*RA is a Roth IRA and follows the same eligibility requirements. To participate in *my*RA , savers (or their spouses, if married filing jointly) must have taxable compensation to be eligible to contribute to a *my*RA account and be within the Roth IRA income guidelines. Savers can contribute to their *my*RA accounts as little as a few dollars up to $5,500 per year (or $6,500 per year for individuals who will be 50 years of age or older at the end of the year). Savers can also withdraw money they put into their *my*RA accounts tax-free and without penalty at any time.  Roth IRA requirements apply to the tax free withdrawal of any earnings.
For more information about *my*RA or to sign up for an account, visit [myRA.gov​](http://www.myra.gov/).
###
