---
title: Treasury Announces Appointments to Tribal Advisory Committee
date: 2015-12-21T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0313
url: /news/press-releases/jl0313
---
*(Archived Content)*

​ **WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the appointment of three tribal representatives to serve on the Department’s Tribal Advisory Committee (TTAC).  Committee members will advise the Secretary on matters related to the taxation of Indians, the training of Internal Revenue Service field agents, and the provision of training and technical assistance to Native American financial officers.  The TTAC was established in keeping with the Tribal General Welfare Exclusion Act of 2014.    Treasury’s appointees to the TTAC will be joined on the committee by four members to be appointed by the Chairs and Ranking Members of the Senate Finance Committee, and the House of Representative Ways and Means Committee.  Each committee chair or ranking member will appoint one TTAC member.   The three individuals appointed serve as members of the TTAC include:  
- W. Ron Allen, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe.  Mr. Allen has served as Tribal Chairman since 1977 and as CEO since 1982. Under his leadership the Jamestown S’Klallam Tribe transitioned from a landless reservation base to a land base of over 1200 acres, and established several business enterprises.  Mr. Allen was President of the National Congress of American Indians from 1995-1999.
 
- Lacey Horn, Treasurer of the Cherokee Nation.  Ms. Horn has served as the top financial executive of the Cherokee Nation since 2011, overseeing the tribe’s budget and an array of general welfare programs.  In 2014 the Native American Financial Officers’ Association named Ms. Horn its Tribal Executive Officer of the Year.  She previously worked at KPMG as a Senior Audit Associate in Financial Services, and in the Internal Audit and Tax Departments of Hunt Oil.
 
- Marilynn “Lynn” Malerba, Lifetime Chief of the Mohegan Tribe.  Ms. Malerba was appointed the traditional leader of the Mohegan Tribe in 2010.  She is a member of several federal advisory committees, including the Indian Health Service Tribal Self Governance Advisory Committee.  Ms. Malerba has also served as Mohegan Tribal Council Chairwoman, and as a Member of the Board of Directors for the Mohegan Sun and Pocono Downs Casinos.
    ###
