---
title:  Treasury Designates a Senior Taliban Member
date: 2015-06-24T00:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0088
url: /news/press-releases/jl0088
---
*(Archived Content)*
 
**Action Targets Leader Who Supports the Taliban’s Financial and Operational Activities WASHINGTON –** Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury designated senior Taliban member Maulawi Abdul Rashid Baluch (Rashid) as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224.  
 
“Today’s action highlights the Taliban’s continuing ties to al-Qa’ida in Pakistan, its destabilizing criminal activity in Afghanistan, and its continued efforts to undermine U.S. interests and harm U.S. personnel in Afghanistan,” said Acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Adam J. Szubin.  “Maulawi Abdul Rashid Baluch has been closely involved in violent attacks and illicit activities.  We will continue to target Taliban leaders like Rashid to disrupt the Taliban’s terrorist operations and its ability to raise, move, and store funds.” 
 
As a result of today’s action, any assets Rashid may have under U.S. jurisdiction are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with him. 
 
** Leadership positions for the Taliban ** Rashid is a senior Taliban member who was actively involved in Taliban operations in southwestern Afghanistan before his July 2014 arrest by Afghan security forces in southern Nimruz Province.  Rashid served in leadership, logistical, and financial support roles for the group since at least 2007 and was the Taliban’s Provincial Shadow Governor of Nimruz Province, Afghanistan, from early 2008 until late 2012.  As of mid-2013, Rashid served as a Taliban liaison officer to al-Qa’ida (AQ) and was responsible for planning meetings between Taliban senior leadership and AQ members in Karachi, Pakistan.** Operational and financing activities for the Taliban ** As a senior Taliban member, Rashid was involved in operational and financial activities for the Taliban.  In mid-2013, Rashid ordered the emplacement of an improvised explosive device (IED) in Nimruz Province which resulted in an explosion that killed one U.S. soldier.  Additionally, Rashid transported IEDs to Afghanistan that were used by the Taliban to target Coalition Forces.  As of early 2008, Rashid and a Taliban associate facilitated the movement of three suicide bombers for attacks in Nimruz Province.  He has also played a role in the deployment of suicide bombers to conduct vehicle-borne IED attacks on senior Afghan government officials and non-governmental organization workers.
 
As of early 2014, Rashid provided $6,000 to $8,000 worth of Pakistani rupees each month to a subordinate Taliban commander for operational use in the Khash Rud region of Nimruz Province, Afghanistan.  
 
** Narcotics-related financial activities for the Taliban ** On behalf of the Taliban, Rashid has also been involved in multiple narcotics-related financial activities, which included delivering funds collected from narcotics traffickers to Taliban commanders.  As of mid-2014, Rashid collected payments for the coordination of Taliban protective escorts for narcotics shipments and disbursed payments to Taliban subordinates.  As of early 2013, Rashid directed a Taliban associate on the disbursement of profits from a narcotics sale.  As of late 2008, Rashid and U.S.- and UN- designated Mohammad Naim Barich agreed to share all profits the Taliban received from narcotics trade and commercial fuel convoy taxation in two districts in southwestern Afghanistan to support Taliban operations.
 
For identifying information on the individual designated today, click [here​](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20150624.aspx).
 
 
###
 
 

​
