---
title: Statement by Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew on Women’s Equality Day
date: 2015-08-26T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0152
url: /news/press-releases/jl0152
---
*(Archived Content)*

  **WASHINGTON** – Today marks the 95th anniversary of the 19th Amendment granting women the right to vote and fully participate in the system our country was founded on—a government of the people, by the people, and for the people.  The women’s suffrage movement is a story of American values. Today, we remember those who courageously marched, protested and campaigned to achieve their goal.  That journey was marked by a sense of optimism and faith in our country, and we honor their leadership and pay thanks to them. 

The Department of the Treasury, wit​h the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, expects to begin to unveil the next family of notes in 2020, the 100th anniversary of the passage of the 19th Amendment, and for the first time in more than a century, our paper currency will feature the portrait of a woman.  America’s currency is a statement of who we are as a country, and the next family of U.S. notes will honor our democracy and our nation’s commitment to equality, fairness, and opportunity.
As we commemorate this anniversary, we must also remember that the struggle for gender equality and equal opportunity continues, including our fight for equal pay and paid leave.  That is why this Administration expanded the child tax credit and the earned income tax credit and has proposed increasing support for families paying for child care.  And that is why the Lilly Ledbetter Act—which makes it easier for women to get paid fairly—was the very first law President Obama signed in 2009.
We must never forget the vital role women have played in building our nation and the countless contributions they have made throughout our history.  It is only right that our currency reflects these contributions and our policy agenda works to shape a strong future with full equality and opportunity for all. 
###
