---
title: ​Readout from a Treasury Spokesperson of Secretary Lew’s Meeting with French Finance Minister Michel Sapin at the G-20 Leaders Summit in Antalya
date: 2015-11-15
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0272
url: /news/press-releases/jl0272
---
*(Archived Content)*

  **ANTALYA, TURKEY** – U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew met today with French Finance Minister Michel Sapin on the sidelines of the G-20 Leaders Summit.   Secretary Lew began the meeting by expressing his deep condolences for the victims and families of the horrific terrorist attacks in Paris and reiterated U.S. support and solidarity for the people of France.    Secretary Lew and Minister Sapin discussed global economic priorities, including the need for countries to more vigorously and effectively use all available policy tools to help reinvigorate global growth now.   They also noted the significant progress donors have made, as outlined in the recent OECD and Climate Policy Initiative report, toward the collective goal of mobilizing $100 billion in climate finance by 2020, and the need to build on this progress at the upcoming climate talks in Paris.    Secretary Lew noted the importance of working to help Greece continue on a constructive path forward within the Eurozone.  He stated that Treasury continues to encourage the Greek government to implement reform and for Europe to follow through on its commitment to work with Greece to restart growth and achieve debt sustainability within the Eurozone.    Following his recent trip to Kyiv, Secretary Lew also discussed the important progress Ukraine has made in advancing economic reform and debt restructuring, with the support of the United States, Europe, and its international partners.  Secretary Lew added it is critical to build on this positive momentum through sustained and strong implementation of the government’s reform program.   # # #
