---
title: Treasury Sanctions Lord’s Resistance Army Commanders Salim and Ali Kony
date: 2016-08-23
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0538
url: /news/press-releases/jl0538
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) designated Salim Kony and Ali Kony, sons of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) leader Joseph Kony, pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13667 for acting for or on behalf of the LRA and/or Joseph Kony. On March 8, 2016, OFAC designated the LRA and Joseph Kony pursuant to E.O. 13667 for engaging in the targeting of civilians in the Central African Republic (CAR) through the commission of acts of violence, abduction, and forced displacement. Today’s action freezes any of Salim or Ali Kony’s assets within U.S. jurisdiction and generally prohibits U.S. persons from engaging in transactions with them. “OFAC remains committed to taking aggressive actions that will further diminish the capabilities of the LRA and its affiliates,” said John E. Smith, OFAC Acting Director. “Today’s action, which targets the finances of the LRA and its leaders while also combatting their participation in the global illicit ivory trade, is the latest in a collaborative international effort to address the widespread violence in the Central African Republic.” The President signed E.O. 13667 on May 12, 2014 to address the sectarian tension and widespread violence and atrocities in the CAR. This E.O. authorizes Treasury to impose sanctions on those who threaten the peace, security, or stability of the CAR, obstruct the peace process in the CAR, recruit child soldiers, target peacekeepers, fuel the conflict in the CAR through the illicit trade of natural resources, or are responsible for human rights abuses or other atrocities in the CAR.**Salim Kony and Ali Kony**Salim and Ali Kony, who have been part of the LRA’s leadership hierarchy since 2010, are part of a group of Kony’s senior LRA officers. Ali, seen as a potential successor to Joseph Kony, is predominantly involved in LRA operational planning and its intelligence apparatus. Salim has taken over most of the LRA’s field operations as the head commander of the LRA’s “field headquarters,” and manages the LRA’s financial and logistical networks. In that role, Salim has also planned LRA attacks and defensive measures alongside Joseph Kony. Salim and Ali have been jointly responsible for enforcing discipline within the LRA, and Salim is reported to have killed LRA members who intended to defect. Since 2014, the LRA has utilized elephant poaching and ivory trafficking to generate revenue to purchase weapons and ammunition that are, in turn, used to continue the group’s attacks against civilians across Central Africa. Salim and Ali have played critical roles in the LRA’s trafficking of ivory from Garamba National Park in northern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) through the CAR to the disputed region of Kafia Kingi for sale or trade with local merchants. While Salim coordinates the transport of ivory, Ali is responsible for negotiating ivory prices and either selling the ivory for U.S. dollars or Sudanese pounds, or for trading the ivory for weapons, ammunition, and food with merchants in Kafia Kingi. In June 2014, Salim entered the DRC with LRA fighters to poach elephants in Garamba and to uncover caches of ivory that had been hidden there years earlier. The following month, Salim participated in the transport of the ivory – 52 pieces in all – to Kafia Kingi, while Ali oversaw the operation to move and deliver the ivory to Joseph Kony in Kafia Kingi for ultimate sale. In addition, Salim participated in the transport of twenty pieces of ivory from the DRC to Kafia Kingi in May 2015.

For identifying information on the individuals designated today, click*here*.

###
