---
title: Joint Statement by U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew and Indonesian Finance Minister Sri Mulyani
date: 2016-10-06T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0568
url: /news/press-releases/jl0568
---
*(Archived Content)*

​ **WASHINGTON** - U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew and Indonesian Finance Minister Sri Mulyani Indrawati today released a joint statement following their meeting at the 2016 Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group in Washington, D.C.: 

“The U.S. Treasury strongly supports the Indonesian Finance Ministry’s efforts to enhance tax policy, the efficacy and administration of its tax system, improve the environment for domestic and foreign businesses, expand its public and private infrastructure, and deepen its financial markets.

“To assist in these endeavors, the U.S. Treasury intends to expand its engagement with the Indonesian Finance Ministry in the following five areas. First, to inform tax reform efforts, the U.S. Treasury intends to share with Indonesia best practices and lessons learned from the U.S. federal tax system. Second, the U.S. Treasury and the Indonesian Finance Ministry intend to pursue engagements to support the development and regulation of Indonesia’s financial sector. Third, the U.S. Treasury is launching a new technical assistance engagement this fall to help strengthen Indonesia’s institutional capacity for analyzing and prioritizing public-private partnerships to deliver quality infrastructure. Fourth, the U.S. Treasury intends to begin providing additional technical assistance early next year to support treasury and cash management reforms. Lastly, the U.S. Treasury intends to hold a regular policy dialogue on macroeconomics and finance, allowing the United States and Indonesia to improve the understanding of each other’s macroeconomic and financial conditions; support mutual objectives of robust, stable, and inclusive economic growth; and coordinate on additional bilateral and multilateral initiatives.

“The United States and Indonesia have strong ties based on shared principles of democracy, good governance, and the promotion of strong and inclusive economic growth. The U.S. Treasury and Indonesian Finance Ministry look forward to strengthening our relationship, in the spirit of the Strategic Partnership forged by President Obama and President Jokowi in October 2015.”
  ###
