---
title: Treasury Designates Three Senior Al-Qaida Members
date: 2016-07-20T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0523
url: /news/press-releases/jl0523
---
*(Archived Content)*​*Action Targets Individuals Responsible for Providing Financial and Logistics Support to al-Qaida*   **WASHINGTON** – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury took action to disrupt the operations, fundraising, and support networks that help al-Qaida move money and operatives from South Asia and across the Middle East by imposing sanctions on three al-Qaida senior members located in Iran.  Specifically, Treasury designated Faisal Jassim Mohammed Al-Amri Al-Khalidi (Al-Khalidi), Yisra Muhammad Ibrahim Bayumi (Bayumi), and Abu Bakr Muhammad Muhammad Ghumayn (Ghumayn) as Specially Designated Global Terrorists pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224 for acting for or on behalf of al-Qaida.  Al-Qaida is listed in the annex to E.O. 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.   As a result of this designation, all property subject to U.S. jurisdiction in which these individuals have any interest is blocked, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in any transactions with them.   “Today’s action sanctions senior al-Qaida operatives responsible for moving money and weapons across the Middle East,” said Adam J. Szubin, Acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.  “Treasury remains committed to targeting al-Qaida’s terrorist activity and denying al-Qaida and its critical support networks access to the international financial system.”**Faisal Jassim Mohammed Al-Amri Al-Khalidi** Al Khalidi is designated for acting for or on behalf of al-Qaida.  Al-Khalidi is a senior al-Qaida official who was an emir of an al-Qaida brigade and part of a new generation of al-Qaida operatives.  In May 2015, as al-Qaida Military Commission Chief, Al-Khalidi participated in an annual al-Qaida Council meeting with other al-Qaida commanders to discuss weapons acquisition.    In 2014, Al-Khalidi was an al-Qaida battalion commander and received funding from al-Qaida.  As of 2011, Al-Khalidi was responsible for liaising between al-Qaida associates and al-Qaida Central Shura members and leaders within the U.S.-designated terrorist group Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan.**Yisra Muhammad Ibrahim Bayumi** Treasury designated Bayumi for acting for or on behalf of al-Qaida.  Bayumi is a veteran al-Qaida member who has been located in Iran since 2014 and a member of al-Qaida since at least 2006.   As of mid-2015, Bayumi was reportedly involved in freeing al-Qaida members in Iran. As of early 2015, he served as a mediator with Iranian authorities.  Prior to that, Bayumi was involved in assisting al-Qaida members located in Iran.  In 2014, al-Qaida members used Bayumi to gather funds.  He has served in several important roles in the group, including, as recently as 2015, securing funds from Syria for al-Qaida members and facilitating al-Qaida funds transfers.**Abu Bakr Muhammad Muhammad Ghumayn** Ghumayn is designated for acting for or on behalf of al-Qaida.  Ghumayn is a senior al-Qaida leader who has served in several financial, communications, and logistical roles for the group.  As of 2015, Ghumayn assumed control of the financing and organization of al-Qaida members located in Iran.  Before he traveled from Waziristan, Pakistan, to Iran, Ghumayn served as a conduit to senior al-Qaida leadership as of late 2014.  As of 2014, Ghumayn served within al-Qaida in an intelligence and security capacity.   For identifying information on today's action, click [here](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20160720.aspx).   ###
