---
title: U.S. Nominates Dr. Jim Yong Kim to Lead World Bank for Second Term
date: 2016-08-25T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0539
url: /news/press-releases/jl0539
---
*(Archived Content)*

​  **WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that the United States is nominating Dr. Jim Yong Kim to be President of the World Bank for a second term.   “I am proud to announce that today the United States has nominated World Bank President Jim Kim for a second term,” said U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew.   “President Kim has used his first term to focus the World Bank on effectively addressing today’s most pressing global development challenges in innovative ways, from ending extreme poverty and tackling inequality, to combating climate change.  President Kim has also ably led responses to major crises, including battling the Ebola pandemic and addressing the refugee crisis. In addition, President Kim spearheaded needed reforms at the World Bank to better leverage knowledge within the Bank and enhance the use of the financial resources that shareholders provide.  Re-electing President Kim will allow the World Bank to continue to build on these important initiatives and reforms.”**Dr. Jim Yong Kim, Nominee for President, The World Bank** Jim Yong Kim, M.D., Ph.D., became the 12th President of the World Bank Group on July 1, 2012.    A physician and anthropologist, Dr. Kim has dedicated himself to international development for more than two decades, helping to improve the lives of under-served populations worldwide. Dr. Kim comes to the Bank after serving as President of Dartmouth College, a pre-eminent center of higher education that consistently ranks among the top academic institutions in the United States. Dr. Kim is a co-founder of Partners In Health (PIH) and a former director of the HIV/AIDS Department at the World Health Organization (WHO).     As President of Dartmouth – an institution that comprises a liberal arts college and professional schools of medicine, engineering and business, as well as 19 graduate programs in the arts and sciences, a staff and faculty of 3,300, and a budget of $700 million – Dr. Kim earned praise for reducing a financial deficit without cutting any academic programs. Dr. Kim also founded the Dartmouth Center for Health Care Delivery Science, a multidisciplinary institute dedicated to developing new models of health care delivery and achieving better health outcomes at lower costs.   Before assuming the Dartmouth presidency, Dr. Kim held professorships and chaired departments at Harvard Medical School, the Harvard School of Public Health and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston. He also served as director of Harvard’s François-Xavier Bagnoud Center for Health and Human Rights.   In 1987, Dr. Kim co-founded Partners In Health, a Boston-based non-profit organization now working in poor communities on 4 continents. Challenging previous conventional wisdom that drug-resistant tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS could not be treated in developing countries, PIH successfully tackled these diseases by integrating large-scale treatment programs into community-based primary care.   As Director of the World Health Organization’s HIV/AIDS Department, Dr. Kim led the ‘3 by 5’ initiative, the first-ever global goal for AIDS treatment, which sought to treat 3 million new HIV/AIDS patients in developing countries with antiretroviral drugs by 2005. Launched in September 2003, the ambitious program ultimately reached its goal by 2007.   Dr. Kim’s work has earned him wide recognition. He was awarded a MacArthur “Genius” Fellowship (2003), was named one of America’s “25 Best Leaders” by *U.S. News & World Report*(2005), and was selected as one of *TIME*magazine’s “100 Most Influential People in the World” (2006).   Born in 1959 in Seoul, South Korea, Dr. Kim moved with his family to the United States at the age of five and grew up in Muscatine, Iowa. Dr. Kim graduated with an A.B. *magna cum laude* from Brown University in 1982. He earned an M.D. from Harvard Medical School in 1991 and a Ph.D. in anthropology from Harvard University in 1993.     # # #
