---
title: Treasury Sanctions Key ISIL Financial Facilitators
date: 2016-09-15T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL5051
url: /news/press-releases/jl5051
---
*(Archived Content)*

​

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today designated ISIL financial facilitators Mohamad Alsaied Alhmidan and Hussam Jamous pursuant to Executive Order 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  Specifically, Treasury imposed sanctions on Alhmidan and Jamous for providing support and services to ISIL.  As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of Alhamidan or Jamous subject to U.S. jurisdiction are blocked, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions involving Alhamidan and Jamous.   Today’s action supports President Obama’s strategy to degrade and destroy ISIL, and builds on Treasury’s ongoing efforts to disrupt ISIL’s finances and deny its access to the international financial system.    “These designations isolate Mohamad Alsaied Alhmidan and Hussam Jamous from the global financial system and expose their activities to the world,” said Adam J. Szubin, Acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.  “Today’s action marks the latest step in Treasury’s efforts to cut off ISIL’s finances and underscores that ISIL financial facilitators are not beyond the reach of the international campaign to defeat ISIL.  Treasury will continue to aggressively target ISIL financial supporters wherever they may be.”** Mohamad Alsaied Alhmidan ** Treasury designated Mohamad Alsaied Alhmidan for providing support and services to ISIL.  Turkey-based Alhmidan provided logistical support and facilitated the movement of tens of thousands of dollars, as well as foreign fighters, for ISIL.** Hussam Jamous ** Treasury designated Hussam Jamous for providing support and services to ISIL.  Hussam Jamous is a Turkey-based ISIL member who has facilitated financial transactions on behalf of ISIL and has been involved in the movement of foreign fighters.  Jamous served as a financial intermediary for ISIL members and received funds on their behalf.    For identifying information click [here](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20160915.aspx).   ###
