---
title: Treasury Designates Senior al-Qaida Leader in Afghanistan
date: 2016-02-10
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0346
url: /news/press-releases/jl0346
---
*(Archived Content)*

**​ WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury today named Nayf Salam Muhammad Ujaym al-Hababi as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) pursuant to Executive Order 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  The Treasury Department targeted al-Hababi for his activities for or on behalf of al-Qaida as the al-Qaida emir for the Eastern Zone of Afghanistan reporting to al-Qaida’s senior leadership.  In this key leadership role, al-Hababi is responsible for planning attacks against U.S. and Coalition forces in Afghanistan, contributing to al-Qaida’s external operations planning, and fundraising on al-Qaida’s behalf.   As a result of today’s action, any property or interest in property of al-Hababi within U.S. jurisdiction is frozen.  Additionally, transactions by U.S. persons involving al-Hababi are generally prohibited.   “Al-Hababi has a long history of directing deadly attacks against U.S. forces and our Coalition allies in Afghanistan, along with plotting al-Qaida terrorist operations in the United States and around the world,” said Adam J. Szubin, Acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.  “To both protect the American people and support our Afghan allies in their quest for peace and stability, Treasury will continue to aggressively target al-Qaida leaders such as al-Hababi for their roles in planning and financing terrorism.”**Leadership**Al-Hababi has operated in Afghanistan since at least 2009 and was serving as the al-Qaida emir for the Eastern Zone of Afghanistan as of 2015.  He has led an al-Qaida battalion in Afghanistan since at least mid-2010 and as of mid-2015 was responsible for finding a new sanctuary for al-Qaida.  For several years, al-Hababi has been in charge of al-Qaida-sponsored training in northeast Afghanistan, providing training and funds to militants to conduct operations.**Fundraising and Weapons Disbursement**Al-Hababi has been involved in raising funds and authorizing spending on behalf of al-Qaida since 2010.  As of 2015, al-Hababi directed the delivery of funds and weapons to Taliban associates in Afghanistan for use in future attacks.  As of 2012, Al-Hababi solicited funds from supporters in Gulf countries to support al-Qaida’s external operations and also expected to receive funds from Gulf-based donors for activities in Afghanistan.  Furthermore, as of 2010, al-Hababi directed the purchase of weapons, including rocket propelled grenades, to distribute to militants in Afghanistan.**Attack Planning**Between at least 2012 and 2015, al-Hababi planned and provided support for al-Qaida attacks against U.S. and Coalition forces in Afghanistan and helped plan al-Qaida’s external operations. As of 2015, al-Hababi worked on attack plans for fighting in northeast Afghanistan.   In early 2013, al-Hababi and his battalion intended to take control of Kunar Province, Afghanistan and establish a base to launch external operations on behalf of al-Qaida.  In revenge for the deaths of senior al-Qaida leaders, al-Hababi planned to carry out attacks in the West, including in the United States and other Western countries.  As of 2012, suicide bombers affiliated with al-Hababi were tasked to attack Afghan bases and Coalition convoys in Afghanistan. As of 2011, al-Hababi was a senior al-Qaida member consulting on al-Qaida operations worldwide.  In 2010, al-Hababi participated in two attacks against Coalition Forces convoys, and he led operations in northeast Afghanistan that included attacks against U.S. military bases in 2009.   For identifying information on the individual designated today, click [here](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20160210.aspx).   ###
