---
title: The United States and Argentina hold Inaugural Argentina-U.S. Dialogue on Illicit Finance
date: 2016-11-29
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0617
url: /news/press-releases/jl0617
---
*(Archived Content)*

​ **WASHINGTON** – The United States and Argentina co-led the inaugural Argentina-U.S. Dialogue on Illicit Finance (AUDIF) on November 22 in Buenos Aires.  United States Treasury Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing Daniel Glaser and Secretary of Finance of the Republic of Argentina Luis Caputo co-chaired the Dialogue.  They were joined by senior officials from Treasury’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), the United States Departments of Justice and Homeland Security, and the Argentine Financial Information Unit (UIF), the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights and the Ministry of Security, as well as representatives of law enforcement and regulatory agencies from both countries.  The Dialogue was agreed to by the governments of Argentina and the United States during meetings between U.S. Treasury Secretary Lew and Argentine Finance Minister Prat-Gay in Buenos Aires in September, and follows the commitment by President Obama and President Macri in March to cooperate to counter illicit financial activity.    The United States Department of the Treasury and the Finance Ministry of Argentina emphasized the commitment of the United States and Argentina to identify illicit finance threats of mutual concern and develop joint strategies to address these threats.  To advance these priorities, the AUDIF agreed to pursue a number of initiatives to counter money laundering, terrorist financing and other financial crimes.     “The U.S.-Argentine commitment to jointly combatting illicit finance and protecting the integrity of our financial systems has never been stronger,” said Daniel L. Glaser, U.S. Treasury Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing.  “We look forward to deepening our cooperation with Argentina and building on our joint efforts to counter terrorist financing, money laundering, and illicit finance.”    “This initiative represents the strongest partnership in the bilateral history of Argentina and the United States to building a safer and sounder financial system and economy. We look forward to working jointly on identifying illicit finance threats of mutual concern and tackling them together,” said Luis Caputo, Secretary of Finance of Argentina.   ###
