---
title: Treasury Designates Al-Qaida, Al-Nusrah Front, AQAP, And Isil Fundraisers And Facilitators
date: 2016-05-19
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0462
url: /news/press-releases/jl0462
---
*(Archived Content)*

***Action Targets Six Individuals Responsible for Providing Financial Support to Terrorist Organizations* WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury took action today to disrupt the fundraising and support networks of al-Qaida, al-Nusrah Front, al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), and ISIL by imposing sanctions on six individuals.  Treasury designated Abdallah Hadi 'Abd al-Rahman Fayhan Sharban al-'Anizi, Abd al-Muhsin Zabin Mutib Naif al-Mutayri, Nayif Salih Salim al-Qaysi, Ghalib al-Zaydi, Mostafa Mahamed, and Salmi Salama Salim Sulayman 'Ammar as Specially Designated Global Terrorists pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  Al-Qaida is listed in the Annex to E.O. 13224, and al-Nusrah Front, AQAP, and ISIL have all been previously designated pursuant to E.O. 13224.

As a result of today's actions, any property or interest in property of the individuals designated by Treasury within U.S. jurisdiction is frozen.  Additionally, transactions by U.S. persons involving the designated individuals are generally prohibited.

"Treasury remains committed to taking aggressive action against ISIL and al-Qaida's financiers and facilitators," said Adam J. Szubin, Acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.  "Today's action targets critical al-Qaida, al-Nusrah Front, AQAP, and ISIL financiers and facilitators responsible for moving money, weapons, and people on behalf of these terrorist organizations."

**Abdullah Hadi 'Abd al-Rahman Fayhan Sharban al-'Anizi** Treasury designated Kuwait-based Abdullah Hadi 'Abd al-Rahman Fayhan Sharban al-'Anizi (al-'Anizi) for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial or other services to or in support of, al-Qaida in Afghanistan and al-Nusrah Front in Syria between late 2013 and late 2015.

Al-'Anizi sent money for al-Qaida in early 2015.  In mid-2014, al-'Anizi provided funding to support the movement of al-Qaida members from Pakistan.  In late 2013, he made plans to solicit funds from donors to help move al-Qaida extremists from Pakistan to Syria.  As of 2010, al-'Anizi served as a communications conduit for al-Qaida senior leadership.

In 2014, al-'Anizi obtained money to support al-Nusrah Front and made arrangements to send funding to al-Nusrah Front in Syria.

**Abd al-Muhsin Zabin Mutib Naif al-Mutayri** Treasury designated Kuwait-based Abd al-Muhsin Zabin Mutib Naif al-Mutayri (al-Mutayri) for providing financial, material, or technological support for, and financial or other services to or in support of, al-Nusrah Front.

As of 2015, al-Mutayri was an al-Nusrah Front supporter in Kuwait who was collecting money for the group from other Gulf-based facilitators.  As of 2013, al-Mutayri worked with al-Nusrah Front facilitators to collect and deliver funds to the organization.  Between 2012 and 2013, he also provided funds to individuals traveling to join al-Nusrah Front in Syria.  Since 2012, al-Mutayri has provided funds to al-Nusrah Front, used charities to raise money for the terrorist organization, and worked with al-Nusrah Front facilitators to collect money to support the organization's fighters in Syria.

**Nayif Salih Salim al-Qaysi** Treasury designated Yemen-based Nayif Salih Salim al-Qaysi (al-Qaysi) for acting for or on behalf of AQAP and for providing financial and material support to AQAP.

As of 2016, al-Qaysi was a senior AQAP official and a financial supporter of AQAP.  At that time, he obtained some money for AQAP from parties outside Yemen.  He delivered aid to AQAP and used his position as an al-Bayda Governorate, Yemen, political leader to facilitate the expansion and settlement of AQAP in the governorate.  That same year, al-Qaysi also facilitated the transfer of money and weapons to AQAP fighters and was involved in supplying AQAP forces in al-Bayda.

Since 2015, al-Qaysi served as an AQAP facilitator who had provided financial support to AQAP to help it take control of parts of Yemen.  At that time, al-Qaysi raised money and transferred it and other forms of aid to AQAP.  His benefactors included parties outside Yemen.  That same year, he was involved in planning AQAP's militant operations in Yemen and financed AQAP training camps.  As of 2015, he also distributed money and weapons to AQAP and allied Yemeni tribal forces for fighting the Yemeni Houthi rebel group.

As of 2014, al-Qaysi routinely encouraged Yemeni tribesmen to avoid confrontation with AQAP.

**Ghalib Abdullah al-Zaidi** Treasury designated Yemen-based Ghalib Abdullah al-Zaidi (al-Zaidi) for acting for or on behalf of AQAP.

Al-Zaidi has provided AQAP with weapons, funding, and recruits.  He also helped AQAP expand into parts of Marib Governorate, Yemen.  As of 2016, he was involved in recruiting new members for AQAP.  He has served as an AQAP leader in Marib since 2015 with AQAP operatives pledging loyalty to him.  In 2015, al-Zaidi financed AQAP operations in Marib and authorized AQAP members in Marib to launch terrorist operations.  In the same year, al-Zaidi obtained money and weapons for AQAP members to use in operations against the Houthis.  As of 2014, al-Zaidi's compound in Marib served as a staging ground for AQAP operatives.

**Mostafa Mahamed** Treasury designated Syria-based Mostafa Mahamed (Mahamed) for acting for or on behalf of and providing financial support to al-Nusrah Front.

Mahamed occupies a senior leadership position in al-Nusrah Front and was subjected to targeted economic sanctions by his home country of Australia in August 2015.  Mahamed has recruited Australians to fight for al-Nusrah Front and has solicited funds to finance al-Nusrah Front's terrorist activities.

**Salmi Salama Salim Sulayman 'Ammar** Treasury also designated Libya-based Salmi Salama Salim Sulayman 'Ammar ('Ammar) for acting for or on behalf of and providing financial and material support to ISIL in the Sinai Peninsula.  This designation is focused on disrupting the activities of one of ISIL's critical facilitators operating in North Africa.  This action follows the U.S. designation of ISIL in Libya as a Foreign Terrorist Organization and supports President Obama's strategy to degrade and destroy ISIL and its affiliates.

As of early 2015, 'Ammar was ISIL – Sinai Province's representative in Libya.  At about the same time, he was involved in transferring hundreds of thousands of dollars from Libya to ISIL's affiliate in the Sinai Peninsula.  While in Syria in late 2014, 'Ammar pledged allegiance to ISIL on behalf of ISIL – Sinai Province, which was formerly known as Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis (ABM).  'Ammar had been representing ABM in Libya since early 2014 and continued serving as its agent in Libya after ABM's pledge to ISIL.  He has helped move money, weapons, and ammunition to the Sinai Peninsula throughout 2014 and into 2015.

For identifying information on today's action, click[here](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20160519.aspx).

###
