---
title: Remarks by Treasury Secretary Lew at the “Let Girls Learn” Event
date: 2016-04-13
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0418
url: /news/press-releases/jl0418
---
*(Archived Content)*

​ **WASHINGTON **- Good morning.  I am very pleased to be at World Bank today. As we all know, the Bank is the world’s premier multilateral institution that fights poverty and builds inclusive growth.  The United States is a proud shareholder and partner of the World Bank's work.    Providing equal opportunity to girls and women is at the heart of inclusive growth, and we are here to help highlight two incredibly important efforts—the World Bank’s program focused on education for adolescent girls and the White House initiative, “Let Girls Learn,” which First Lady Michelle Obama has been a driving force behind.   If there is a will to learn, there should be a way.  But, for millions of girls around the world, just wanting an education is not enough.  At any given time, more than 62 million girls worldwide are not in school, and millions more are fighting to stay there.   As a girl grows older, that fight becomes even harder.  Families may not be able to afford, or even be willing, to pay school fees.  Many more girls risk long, dangerous walks to school.  Some may become pregnant or be forced to marry.  And many often lack access to the proper healthcare and good nutrition essential to arriving at school ready to learn, or the electricity needed to study at home.   The First Lady and the World Bank are working to make this a fair fight, and ultimately provide economic opportunities for millions of girls and their families. If we are to end extreme poverty, all people must have the opportunity to succeed.   I commend the World Bank for its work on education for girls, and would like to warmly introduce President Kim at this time.   President Kim has been  an extraordinary vision-setter for this institution. He has not only rallied World Bank staff and shareholders around the twin goals of eradicating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity, but he has inspired leaders across the private sector, donor countries, and most importantly, client countries themselves, to dare think that the goals are achievable within specific deadlines.    President Kim brings the rigor of a scientist, the thirst for ongoing learning and improvement of a scholar, and the action-orientation and passion of a tireless advocate for the poor to his job and we are  well served by his leadership.   Jim, thank you for your personal engagement on the important issue we are celebrating today in addition to countless other initiatives from climate change to financial inclusion.     ###
