---
title: Treasury Sanctions Tanzanian Kingpin and his East Africa-Based Drug Trafficking Organization
date: 2016-03-09
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0378
url: /news/press-releases/jl0378
---
*(Archived Content)*

  *​Action Targets the Hassan Drug Trafficking Organization, a Key Cocaine and Heroin Smuggling Organization*   **WASHINGTON** – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) identified Tanzanian national Ali Khatib Haji Hassan (a.k.a. “Shkuba”) and the Hassan Drug Trafficking Organization as significant foreign narcotics traffickers pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act).  Hassan is a major international drug kingpin who smuggles multi-ton shipments of heroin and cocaine to Africa, Europe, Asia, and North America via his East Africa-based drug trafficking organization.  As a result of today’s action, all assets of Hassan and his organization that are within U.S. jurisdiction or that are in the control of U.S. persons are frozen, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.   After an intensive two-year manhunt, Hassan was arrested in 2014 by Tanzanian authorities for smuggling approximately 210 kilograms of heroin, which was seized in January 2012 in Lindi, Tanzania.  Hassan has frequently attempted to bribe African government officials to avoid arrest and prosecution for his drug trafficking activities.     “Today’s action imposes sanctions on Ali Khatib Haji Hassan and his illicit drug trafficking network for smuggling heroin and cocaine around the world and seeking to use their illicit profits to bribe African government officials,” said OFAC Acting Director John E. Smith.  “Narcotics traffickers like the Hassan Drug Trafficking Organization pose a significant threat to the international financial system and regional stability, and Treasury remains committed to exposing and targeting those fueling the global drug trade.”   The Hassan Drug Trafficking Organization obtains multi-ton quantities of heroin from sources in Southwest Asia as well as multi-ton quantities of cocaine from South American suppliers.  Since at least 2006, Hassan has directed members of his network to send shipments of heroin to destinations including China, Europe, and the United States.  Hassan served as the primary distributor for Tanzania-based drug traffickers who regularly received multi-hundred kilogram maritime shipments of heroin from the Makran coast of Pakistan and Iran.  Hassan also oversaw an extensive drug network in Latin America that distributed South American cocaine into East Africa en route to Europe and China.   Since June 2000, more than 1,800 entities and individuals have been named pursuant to the Kingpin Act for their role in international narcotics trafficking.  Penalties for violations of the Kingpin Act range from civil penalties of up to $1.075 million per violation to more severe criminal penalties.  Criminal penalties for corporate officers may include up to 30 years in prison and fines of up to $5 million.  Criminal fines for corporations may reach $10 million.  Other individuals could face up to 10 years in prison and fines pursuant to Title 18 of the United States Code for criminal violations of the Kingpin Act.   To see the identifying information relating to today’s actions, click [here](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20160309.aspx).   For the report to Congress identifying Ali Khatib Haji Hassan and the Hassan Drug Trafficking Organization pursuant to Section 805(b)(l) of the Kingpin Act, click [here](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/20160309_kingpin_report.pdf).   For a complete listing of designations pursuant to the Kingpin Act, click [here](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/narco_designations_kingpin.pdf).   ###
