---
title: Remarks by U.S. Treasury Secretary Lew at Meeting with Mexican Secretary of Finance and Public Credit Meade
date: 2016-09-29
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0565
url: /news/press-releases/jl0565
---
*(Archived Content)*

​ **MEXICO CITY** – I would like to thank Secretary Meade for the warm welcome to Mexico and for hosting me here today.  It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to meet again in person as he takes the helm of the Finance Ministry for the second time.  The U.S. Treasury has enjoyed a long history of close cooperation with our Mexican counterparts, and I am confident that our relationship will continue to flourish under Secretary Meade’s leadership.   Our two countries draw enormous strengths from the deep ties of family, friendship, language, and culture.  And our relationship is of vital importance, both strategically and economically.  Together, we must remain a solid and stable center of growth in the world.   And as we celebrate our strong economic ties and vibrant, interconnected communities, we must also remain vigilant in protecting these relationships from abuse, work together to combat criminals that seek to take advantage of these close ties, and safeguard the integrity and integration of our financial systems and economies.   We must support this strong foundation by continuing our efforts to advance regional competitiveness through high standards trade.  We have an opportunity to project shared leadership and ensure that others do not write the rules for the global economy in the 21st century.  Approving the Trans-Pacific Partnership will link our businesses and workers to the most dynamic markets in the world and reaffirm our commitment to openness, transparency, and the rule of law.   Together, we can promote sustainable and balanced growth at home and abroad, while working to protect our environment, develop the innovation economy of tomorrow, and renew our commitment to our workers and companies affected by the forces of globalization.    As we have discussed here today, the United States and Mexico will continue to pursue our shared vision of prosperity, security, and integration, based on mutual respect.  I am confident that together we will continue to find success.   Thank you.       # # #
