---
title: Report on U.S. Portfolio Holdings of Foreign Securities at End of Year 2014
date: 2016-01-29T00:00:00-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: JL0333
url: /news/press-releases/jl0333
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** –The findings from the annual survey of U.S. portfolio holdings of foreign securities at year-end 2014 were released today and posted on the Treasury web site at[http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/Pages/fpis.aspx](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/Pages/fpis.aspx).

The survey was undertaken jointly by the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

A complementary survey measuring foreign holdings of U.S. securities is also conducted annually.  Data from the most recent such survey, which reports on securities held at end-June 2015, are currently being processed.  Preliminary results are expected to be reported on February 29, 2016.

Overall Results

This survey measured the value of U.S. portfolio holdings of foreign securities at year-end 2014 as approximately $9.6 trillion, with $6.8 trillion held in foreign equity, $2.5 trillion held in foreign long-term debt securities (original term-to-maturity in excess of one year), and $0.4 trillion held in foreign short-term debt securities.  The previous such survey, conducted as of year-end 2013, measured U.S. holdings of approximately $9.1 trillion, with $6.5 trillion held in foreign equity, $2.3 trillion held in foreign long-term debt securities, and $0.4 trillion held in foreign short-term debt securities.  The largest gain occurred in equities, largely reflecting gains in global stock markets during 2014.

U.S. portfolio holdings of foreign securities by country at the end of 2014 were the largest for the United Kingdom ($1.30 trillion), followed by the Cayman Islands ($1.15 trillion), Canada,($844 billion), and Japan ($689 billion) (see Table 2).  These four countries attracted 41 percent of total U.S. portfolio investment, the same share as in the previous year.The surveys are part of an internationally coordinated effort under the auspices of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to improve the measurement of portfolio asset holdings.

**Table 1.  U.S. holdings of foreign securities, by type of security, as of survey dates [1]**(Billions of dollars)

Type of Security

Dec. 31, 2013

Dec. 31, 2014

Long-term Securities

8,777

9,271

Equity

6,473

6,762

Long-term debt

2,305

2,509

 

Short-term debt securities

353

369

**Total 9,130 9,640**

U.S. Portfolio Investment by Country

**Table 2.  Market value of U.S. holdings of foreign securities, by country and type of security, for the countries attracting the most U.S. investment, as of December 31, 2014 [1]**

 
###
