---
title: Treasury Department Announces Appointment of Chief of Staff
date: 2017-02-15T07:00:00-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0004
url: /news/press-releases/sm0004
---
**Washington** – Newly confirmed Secretary of the Treasury Steven T. Mnuchin announced today the appointment of Eli Miller to serve as the Chief of Staff of the Treasury Department.

Mr. Miller previously served as Chief Operating Officer of Finance for Donald J. Trump for President, Inc.  In that role, Mr. Miller developed and managed the campaign’s finance process in conjunction with the Republican National Committee (RNC) and worked to help President Trump secure the White House. Earlier in his career, Mr. Miller was an aide to then-Speaker of the House of Representatives John Boehner. Prior to his appointment as Treasury Chief of Staff, Mr. Miller worked with members of the Presidential transition staff and the White House staff to support confirmation of Secretary Mnuchin by the U.S. Senate. Mr. Miller and his family reside in the District of Columbia. 

“I look forward to continuing to work with Eli to achieve the goals set out by President Trump and this Administration,” Secretary Mnuchin said of this appointment. “We look forward to getting to work to help all Americans secure better economic opportunities.”

“I thank Secretary Mnuchin for the honor of this appointment,” said Eli Miller, “I look forward to the work we need to do at Treasury and assisting this great organization as we serve the American public.”

The Chief of Staff is responsible for managing the day-to-day operations of the Department generally and the office of the Secretary specifically. In this capacity, the Chief of Staff operates in direct support of the Secretary and plays a key role in advising, coordinating and reviewing policy development within the Department, other agencies, and the White House as well as assisting and planning the overall strategic direction of the Department.
 

###
