---
title: Treasury Takes Action to Target Serious Human Rights Abuses in Iran
date: 2017-04-13T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0043
url: /news/press-release/sm0043
---
**Washington**– Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) sanctioned the Tehran Prisons Organization and Sohrab Soleimani, a senior official within Iran’s State Prison Organization, in connection with serious human rights abuses in Iran.  This action reflects the United States’ deep concern regarding the human rights situation in Iran.

 
“Today’s designations highlight our continued support for the Iranian people and demonstrate our commitment to hold the Government of Iran responsible for its continued repression of its own citizens,” said OFAC Director John E. Smith.  “We will continue to identify, call out, and sanction those who are responsible for serious human rights abuses in Iran.”
 
The United States maintains and will continue to vigorously exercise its sanctions authorities outside the scope of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) to counter the Iranian government’s support for terrorism, ballistic missile program, regional destabilization, and human rights abuses.  The sanctions imposed today are fully consistent with U.S. commitments under the JCPOA.
 
Tehran Prisons Organization and Sohrab Soleimani are designated pursuant to Executive Order 13553, which targets serious human rights abuses by officials of, and persons acting on behalf of, the Government of Iran since the June 2009 Iranian election.
 
Tehran Prisons Organization is responsible for or complicit in the commission of serious human rights abuses against political prisoners housed in Evin Prison, which falls under the authority of the Tehran Prisons Organization.  Evin Prison is one of Iran’s most notorious facilities, due to the detention of many prisoners of conscience and well-documented accounts of their mistreatment and abuse.  Former prisoners of Evin Prison have reported harsh interrogations, forced confessions, psychological and physical torture, and denial of access to medical care.
 
In an April 2014 incident at Evin Prison, dozens of security guards and senior prison officials attacked and severely beat political prisoners being held in Ward 350.  The attack lasted several hours and over 30 prisoners were wounded or injured.  Some of the prisoners were placed in solitary confinement afterward and did not receive medical treatment, despite their injuries.
 
Sohrab Soleimani was the head of the Tehran Prisons Organization during this violent event, and is being designated for having acted for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Tehran Prisons Organization.  After the Ward 350 prisoner attack, Soleimani denied that anything had taken place, despite the numerous well-documented accounts of the incident.  Soleimani currently holds a leadership position within the State Prisons Organization, which oversees Tehran Prisons Organization.  Since April 2014, attacks on prisoners and other human rights abuses at Evin Prison have continued, including the denial of access to medical care.
 
[For identifying information on the entity and individual designated today, click here.](https://auth.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20170413.aspx)

####
