---
title: Secretary Mnuchin Leads Middle East Trip Focused on Combatting Terrorist Financing
date: 2017-10-20T10:36:54-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0185
url: /news/press-releases/sm0185
---
*Trip will Advance the Mission of the Terrorist Financing Targeting Center, and *

*Include Meetings with Saudi Arabia, Israel, UAE, Qatar and Regional Stakeholders*
 

**WASHINGTON** – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced some of the key engagements that will occur during Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin’s upcoming trip to the Middle East. This White House support mission is a follow-up to President Donald J. Trump’s first foreign trip in May, when he visited the region to announce the Terrorist Financing Targeting Center (TFTC) Memorandum of Understanding. Secretary Mnuchin, accompanied by Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Sigal Mandelker, will lead a delegation that includes senior Treasury staff and members of the media to discuss the TFTC partnership, and other important national security initiatives to combat terrorism and illicit finance.
 
While in Saudi Arabia, Secretary Mnuchin will commemorate the opening of the TFTC, deliver the keynote address to the Future Investment Initiative summit, and meet with his official government counterparts. The Secretary will proceed to Israel to meet with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to discuss terrorist financing and other national security issues. The Secretary will then hold meetings on terrorist financing with his official government counterparts in the United Arab Emirates and Qatar.
 
“Our Middle East trip will focus on combatting terrorist financing and illicit activities, while building on the important national security and anti-terrorism initiatives that developed from the President’s successful visit to the region in May. Our trip includes meetings with Gulf partners essential to the development of the Terrorist Financing Targeting Center, and will expand the dialogue on efforts to combat terrorism in new and impactful ways,” said Secretary Mnuchin. “Our trip will include official meetings and events with leaders from Saudi Arabia, Israel, the UAE, and Qatar, and with stakeholders across the region to strengthen our shared resolve to counter the financing of terrorism. We will engage partners in the Middle East on the Trump administration’s new strategy toward countering the destabilizing influence of Iran in the region.”
 
A partial itinerary of the Secretary’s schedule is included below:

- Wednesday, October 25, 2017 ** Riyadh, Saudi Arabia** – Secretary Mnuchin will commemorate the Terrorist Financing Targeting Center, and deliver the keynote address at the Future Investment Initiative summit. The Secretary and the delegation are pursuing bilateral meetings with official government counterparts, including with the Minister of Finance, Mohammed Al-Jadaan, and others.
- Thursday, October 26, 2017 ** Jerusalem** – Secretary Mnuchin and the delegation will participate in a series of meetings and events in Israel, including a meeting with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to discuss terrorist financing and other national security issues.
- Friday, October 27, 2017 ** Jerusalem** – Secretary Mnuchin and the delegation will participate in a business roundtable, have a bilateral meeting to discuss terrorist financing with Israeli Minister of Finance, Moshe Kahlon, and participate in official events.
- Saturday, October 28, 2017 ** Jerusalem and Dubai** – Secretary Mnuchin and the delegation will participate in official meetings and events.
- Sunday, October 29, 2017 ** Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates** – Secretary Mnuchin and the delegation are pursuing bilateral meetings with official government counterparts in U.A.E. to discuss terrorist financing, including with UAE Minister of State for Financial Affairs, H.E. Obaid Al Tayer, and others.
- Monday, October 30, 2017 ** Doha, Qatar** – Secretary Mnuchin and the delegation are meeting with official government counterparts in Qatar to discuss terrorist financing, including with the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim Bin Hamad Al-Thani, Qatari Minister of Finance, Ali Shareef Al Emadi, and other senior Qatari officials.

NOTES: Details are subject to change, and more information on specific meetings will be provided during a background media briefing prior to the delegation’s departure.
####
