---
title: Treasury Sanctions ISIS Fighter
date: 2017-07-21
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0129
url: /news/press-releases/sm0129
---
*Action Taken Concurrently with the United Nations Security Council Resolution to Renew the UN Sanctions on ISIL and Al-Qaida *
 
**Washington**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) took action today against Malik Ruslanovish Barkhanoev (Barkhanoev), an Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) fighter.  Barkhanoev is being designated as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of Barkhanoev subject to U.S. jurisdiction are blocked, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with him.
 
This designation not only underscores the Treasury Department’s efforts to target ISIS fighters, but it also highlights the U.S. government’s commitment to work in concert with our international partners to counter ISIS and other terrorist groups.  Yesterday, the United Nations (UN) adopted a new Security Council resolution (UNSCR 2368) to renew the UN sanctions targeting the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida.  This year's resolution incorporated an Annex of individuals and entities – including Barkhanoev and the Khalid bin Al-Walid Army, a Syria-based extremist group aligned with ISIS that was formerly known as the Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade and whose designation was amended today by the State Department to reflect this change in name –added to the UN’s 1267 ISIL and Al-Qaida Sanctions List.  Additional Annex listings included SDGTs Selselat al Thahab Money Exchange, Hanifa Money Exchange Office in Albu Kamal, Syria, Oman Rochman, and Muhammad Bahrun Naim Anggih Tamtomo, who all were previously designated by OFAC pursuant to E.O. 13224, as well as Murad Margoshvili and Jund al Aqsa, who were previously designated by the State Department pursuant to E.O. 13224.  Several of these listings received co-sponsorships at the UN from twelve other countries, demonstrating the international resolve of today’s action.  As a result of these UN listings, all member states of the UN are obligated to freeze their assets, deny them access to the international financial system, and prohibit their travel. 
 
“Treasury is targeting a violent individual who has served as a fighter for ISIS,” said OFAC Director John E. Smith.  “This action, which was taken concurrently with new UN sanctions, underscores the United States’ resolve to work with our international partners to further restrict terrorists’ access to the international financial system.”
 

### Malik Ruslanovish Barkhanoev

 
OFAC designated Barkhanoev for acting for or on behalf of ISIS.
 
Barkhanoev originally traveled to Syria through Turkey and attended a terrorist training camp.  After completing his training, Barkhanoev joined an ISIS group in Syria.  In 2015, Barkhanoev publically announced that he was fighting alongside ISIS and was based in the Syrian city of Manbij.
 
[Identifying information on the individual designated today](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20170721.aspx).
 
####
