---
title: "Remarks by Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin Swearing-In Ceremony of Jovita Carranza as the 44th Treasurer of the United States"
date: 2017-06-19
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/sm0112
press_release_number: SM0112
---

As Prepared for Delivery
Good morning. It is a pleasure to be here with everyone today for this exciting occasion. I would like to especially welcome Jovita's daughter Klaudene to the Diplomatic Room, one of the most beautiful spaces in the building. Given our surroundings this is a fitting place to welcome Jovita Carranza as the 44th Treasurer of the United States.
Jovita says that she learned the value of a dollar at a young age and today she is putting her name on it. It is remarkable that we live in a country where that is possible.
Jovita has an enviable work ethic and sense of determination. Growing up in Chicago, she started her first job at just 12 years old – cleaning a discount store in her neighborhood and earning $5 a week. From there she moved on to babysitting, and then to Montgomery Ward where her job was to sell pens. This is a woman who from day one has recognized the value of hard work in achieving success.
Her career at UPS was no different. She began loading trucks and was quickly spotted by a supervisor as someone with great potential, which got her started on the management track. She spent the next 30 years moving up the ranks, and retired as the Vice President of Air Operations for UPS. Her values propelled her to the top of that organization and it is easy to see why.
Jovita represents the opportunity that this country affords all of its citizens. She has an entrepreneurial spirit and knows the value of a dollar. This is why I have asked Jovita to spearhead the Department's efforts to promote financial education at all stages of life. From childhood to retirement and every stage in between, making smart, informed financial decisions benefits families, communities, and our economy. Nowhere is this truer than in underserved communities. Jovita will be successful in this effort as she understands the challenges such families are facing. She is a role model for those who want to live the American Dream and she embodies her vision for promoting financial education across America: start small and finish big.
I look forward to working with you, Jovita, and congratulate you on this honor.
