---
title: Treasury Sanctions ISIS Facilitator-Recruiter-Fighter
date: 2017-06-16
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0111
url: /news/press-releases/sm0111
---
*Action Taken Concurrently with UN Designation *
 
**Washington**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) took action today against Fared Saal (Saal), an Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) facilitator, recruiter, and fighter.  Saal is being designated as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) pursuant to Executive Order 13224, which targets terrorists and their supporters.  As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of Saal subject to U.S. jurisdiction are blocked, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with him.
 
Underscoring the U.S. government’s commitment to work with our international partners to counter ISIS, today’s designation comes immediately following coordinated international action by the United Nations (UN) Security Council to add Saal to the UN Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) and al-Qa’ida Sanctions List.  As a result of his UN listing, all member states of the UN are obligated to freeze Saal’s assets, deny him access to the international financial system, and prohibit his travel.
 
“We are targeting a dangerous individual responsible for providing support to ISIS in a variety of ways, including serving as a facilitator, recruiter, and fighter for this deadly terrorist organization,” said OFAC Director John E. Smith.  “This action was taken concurrently with new UN sanctions and demonstrates the United States’ resolve to work hand-in-hand with our international partners to further restrict terrorists’ access to the international financial system.”
 
**Fared Saal**Saal was designated for acting for or on behalf of ISIS. 
 
Saal, an ISIS facilitator, recruiter, and fighter, has been a member of the terrorist organization since at least 2014.  After joining ISIS, Saal recruited potential ISIS members and facilitated their travel to Syria by providing them with specific contacts to reach out to once they arrived at the airport in Istanbul.  The contacts would then help facilitate the recruits’ onward travel to the Turkish/Syrian border.  In December 2014, Saal facilitated the travel of two Austrian minors from Austria to Syria; however, they were stopped and detained while in transit.  As of March 2015, Saal also served as a point of contact for ISIS fighters seeking specialized training. 
 
In addition to his facilitation and recruitment activities, Saal has served as an ISIS fighter.  As of March 2016, Saal held a leadership position in an ISIS battalion.  Furthermore, Saal appeared in an ISIS propaganda video depicting the aftermath of a July 2014 ISIS attack on the Al-Shaar gas field in Syria alongside SDGT Denis Cuspert, a foreign terrorist fighter and operative for ISIS, who was designated by the U.S. Department of State on February 9, 2015. 
 
[Identifying information on the individual designated today](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20170616_33.aspx).
 
####
