---
title: 'Treasury Sanctions Prominent Al-Nusrah Front and Al-Qa''ida Facilitator'
date: 2017-03-14T09:28:34-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0027
url: /news/press-releases/sm0027
---
*Action Targets Kuwait-based Terrorist Financier*  
 
**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) took action today against al-Nusrah Front (ANF) and al-Qa’ida (AQ) facilitator Muhammad Hadi al-`Anizi (al-`Anizi).  Al-`Anizi, who is based in Kuwait, is being designated as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) pursuant to Executive Order 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of al-`Anizi subject to U.S. jurisdiction are blocked, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with him.
 
“From raising funds to facilitating the travel of terrorists, al-`Anizi is responsible for providing key financial and logistical support to al-Nusrah Front and al-Qa’ida,” said John E. Smith, OFAC Director. “The Treasury Department will continue to aggressively target al-Nusrah Front’s and al-Qa’ida’s financial structures to further disrupt their ability to conduct terrorist attacks.” 
                       
**Muhammad Hadi al-`Anizi** Muhammad Hadi al-`Anizi was designated for providing support and services to ANF and AQ.
 
Al-`Anizi, a terrorist facilitator and financier based in Kuwait, has provided extensive material and financial support to ANF since at least 2014.  In late 2015, al-`Anizi solicited donations for ANF fighters in Syria and sent approximately $20,000 to an ANF member in Syria.  In late 2014, al-`Anizi worked with an ANF associate to provide hundreds of thousands of dollars to ANF members in Syria.
 
Al-`Anizi has also provided extensive material and financial support to AQ since at least 2007.  In late 2015, al-`Anizi sought assistance from AQ financier and U.S.- and UN-designated terrorist Sa’d al-Ka’bi to facilitate the travel of AQ-associated individuals.  In mid- to late-2014, al-`Anizi obtained passports for an AQ associate in Syria, provided medical supplies to an injured Syria-based AQ associate, and was appointed as AQ’s representative in Syria by AQ senior leadership.  Prior to 2014, al-`Anizi provided financial support to his brother, AQ facilitator and SDGT Abdullah al-`Anizi, who used the money to fund terrorist operations.
 
[Identifying information on the individual designated today.](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20170314.aspx)
 
###
