---
title:  Treasury Sanctions Libya-Based ISIS Financial Facilitators and Algerian ISIS Supporter and Arms Trafficker
date: 2017-04-13T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0042
url: /news/press-release/sm0042
---
*​**Action Underscores Treasury’s Commitment to Target ISIS in North Africa*

 
**Washington** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today designated Libya-based Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) financial facilitators Ali Ahmidah al-Safrani and Abd al Hadi Zarqun, as well as Algerian ISIS supporter Hamma Hamani.  Al-Safrani and Zarqun were designated pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  Hamani was designated pursuant to E.O. 13224 and E.O. 13726, which targets those engaging in actions or policies that threaten the peace, security, or stability of Libya including through the supply of arms or related materiel.  Al-Safrani and Zarqun are Libyan nationals and have played important roles in ISIS’s financial operations in Libya.  Hamani is an Algerian national who provided support to ISIS.  As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of al-Safrani, Zarqun, and Hamani subject to U.S. jurisdiction are blocked, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.
 
“These designations isolate al-Safrani, Zarqun, and Hamani from the global financial system and expose their activities to the world,” said OFAC Director John E. Smith.  “Today’s action not only targets ISIS’s activities in North Africa but it also demonstrates Treasury’s commitment to pursue terrorists wherever they are.” 

**Ali Ahmidah al-Safrani**OFAC designated Ali Ahmidah al-Safrani for acting for or on behalf of ISIS.  Al-Safrani pledged allegiance to ISIS prior to 2015 and is responsible for handling financial activities for the group in Libya.  Al-Safrani also assisted the overall ISIS leader and commander in Sirte, Libya.  For the past two years, al-Safrani has been one of the most prominent leaders within ISIS in Libya.**Abd al Hadi Zarqun**OFAC designated Abd al Hadi Zarqun for acting for or on behalf of ISIS.  Zarqun is a Libya-based ISIS financier who was one of the most prominent ISIS leaders in Sirte, Libya.  He helped establish the initial ISIS presence in Sirte and was one of the first Libyan extremists to pledge allegiance to ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.  As of mid-2016, Zarqun remained a high-level ISIS leader in Libya.**Hamma Hamani**OFAC designated Hamma Hamani for acting for or on behalf of ISIS and for engaging in actions or policies that threaten the peace, security, or stability of Libya including through the supply of arms or related materiel.  In 2016, Hamani provided support to ISIS and for several years he has been involved in weapons trafficking in Libya.

 

[For identifying information on the individuals designated today, click here.](https://auth.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20170413.aspx)
 
####
