---
title: 'Joint Press Release: Initial Results of the 100-Day Action Plan of the U.S. - China Comprehensive Economic Dialogue '
date: 2017-05-11T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0082
url: /news/press-release/sm0082
---
**Washington** - President of the United States Donald Trump and President of the People’s Republic of China Xi Jinping agreed at their Mar-a-Lago meeting to advance U.S. - China economic cooperation with a 100-day action plan under the framework of the U.S. - China Comprehensive Economic Dialogue. Under the leadership of the co-chairs, Secretary of the Treasury Steven T. Mnuchin, Secretary of Commerce Wilbur Ross of the United States and Vice Premier Wang Yang of China, both nations have negotiated intensively to make progress on key issues. The three co-chairs reached consensus on initial commitments under the 100-day plan and objectives for next steps. 
  

In approximately one month following the Presidential Summit, the two sides reached consensus on addressing issues in areas including agricultural trade, financial services, investment, and energy. [For details, see the attached U.S.-China joint fact sheet.](https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Documents/Initial-Actions-of-the-100-day-Plan-English-Official-5-11-17.pdf)
 
Both sides also identified other issues that will require significant effort to resolve and achieve progress on within the 100-day period.  Both sides further committed to strengthen communication and coordination to jointly advance those issues and achieve resolution as soon as possible.  Further, as concrete progress is made in implementing the actions under the 100-day plan, the two sides will begin discussing a one-year plan to further solidify actions in promoting U.S. - China economic engagement and cooperation.  Following implementation of the 100-day plan, the United States and China look forward to deepening engagement on these and other issues at the first meeting of the Comprehensive Economic Dialogue, to be held in the United States in the summer of 2017.
