---
title: Secretary of the Treasury Announces Senior Staff
date: 2017-03-10T07:55:44-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0025
url: /news/press-releases/sm0025
---
**Washington, D.C. –**The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the appointment of several key senior staff members who will serve Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin as he begins his tenure.

"I am pleased to have these highly capable and accomplished individuals join my Treasury leadership team," said Secretary Mnuchin. "I look forward to having their valuable input and leadership as we move President Trump's ambitious economic growth agenda forward on behalf of the American public."

**Counselor – Dan Kowalski**Dan Kowalski joins Treasury after serving 19 years on Capitol Hill, most recently as the Deputy Staff Director of the Senate Budget Committee.  As Counselor, he will focus on federal budgetary issues, matters involving the debt limit, and infrastructure finance.  Kowalski served as Deputy National Policy Director and Senior Advisor for Budget Policy for Donald J. Trump for President, Inc. Kowalski also served on the staffs of the House Budget Committee and the Congressional Budget Office. Kowalski earned his BA from St. John's College in Annapolis, Maryland and his MPP from Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government.**Counselor – Shannon McGahn**Shannon McGahn joins Treasury with more than 15 years of experience on Capitol Hill and in public affairs, most recently serving as Staff Director for the House Financial Services Committee under Chairman Jeb Hensarling.  As Counselor, she will advise the Secretary on matters relating to both legislative and public affairs.  Previously, McGahn served in communications roles for three members of House Republican leadership.  In 2015, McGahn was mentioned by National Journal as one of the "20 Most Powerful Women Staffers on Capitol Hill" and by Marie Claire as one of the "50 Most Influential Women in America".  A native of Westerville, Ohio, McGahn earned her BA in History from The George Washington University.**Counselor – Justin Muzinich**Justin Muzinich joins Treasury having held leadership roles in policy and in business.  As Counselor, Muzinich will work closely with Secretary Mnuchin on major policy initiatives, both domestic and international, and will work with the Office of Tax Policy and the Office of Economic Policy on tax reform.  Most recently, Muzinich served as President of Muzinich & Co., an international investment firm, and taught at Columbia Business School.  He holds a JD from Yale Law School where he was an Olin Fellow, a MBA from Harvard Business School where he was a Baker Scholar, and a BA from Harvard College.**Counselor – Craig Phillips**Craig Phillips joins Treasury having played a variety of leadership roles in the financial services industry over a 40 year career.  As Counselor, Phillips will work with Secretary Mnuchin on issues relating to domestic finance, housing finance policy and regulatory reform.  Phillips has broad domestic and international experience in markets, financial regulation, risk management and financial stability initiatives.  Most recently, Phillips was a Managing Director and Member of the Operating Committee of BlackRock, Inc.  At BlackRock, Phillips led a broad-based practice which advised central banks, banking supervisors and multi-lateral organizations around the world, including the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Phillips holds a BA in Economics and Business Administration from Vanderbilt University.

###
