---
title: Treasury Targets Pakistan-Based Terrorist Leaders and Facilitators 
date: 2017-05-11
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0080
url: /news/press-release/sm0080
---
**WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) took action today to disrupt the leadership of Jama'at ul Dawa al-Qu'ran (JDQ) and financial support networks of JDQ, the Taliban, al-Qa'ida, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba (LT), the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), and ISIS – Khorasan by designating three individuals and one entity based in Pakistan.  Specifically, OFAC designated Hayat Ullah Ghulam Muhammad (Haji Hayatullah), Ali Muhammad Abu Turab (Abu Turab), Inayat ur Rahman, and a purported charity managed by Inayat ur Rahman, the Welfare and Development Organization of Jamaat-ud-Dawah for Qur'an and Sunnah (WDO).  These actions were taken pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  As a result of today's action, all property and interests in property of these persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are blocked, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.

"These sanctions seek to disrupt the financial support networks of terrorists based in Pakistan who have provided support to the Taliban, al-Qa'ida, ISIS, and LT for recruitment and funding of suicide bombers and other violent insurgent operations," said OFAC Director John E. Smith.  "The United States continues to aggressively target extremists in Pakistan and the surrounding region, including charities and other front groups used as vehicles to facilitate illicit terrorist activities.  The three individuals and entity we designated today have connections with terrorist groups that are a direct threat to the security of both the United States and Pakistan.  The individuals are opportunistic and willing to work with extremist organizations, even those ideologically opposed to one another, to help them deepen their foothold in the region."

### Hayat Ullah Ghulam Muhammad

OFAC designated Hayat Ullah Ghulam Muhammad for acting for or on behalf of JDQ and LT, and for providing material and financial support to the Taliban, al-Qa'ida, ISIS, and ISIS – Khorasan.

Haji Hayatullah is a senior JDQ leader.  In 2015, Haji Hayatullah was providing support to ISIS – Khorasan, and as of 2016, he had offered weapons and financial support for ISIS – Khorasan members in Afghanistan.  In early 2016, Haji Hayatullah was recruiting on behalf of ISIS – Khorasan from the madrassas he controlled in Kunar Province, Afghanistan, and in Pakistan.  Haji Hayatullah used one of the madrassas as a training center for ISIS – Khorasan.

Haji Hayatullah has provided support to ISIS since 2014, when he supported ISIS's recruitment and funding of suicide bombers and their travel to Syria and Iraq.  As of 2015, Haji Hayatullah was working to assist ISIS in establishing a network in Afghanistan.  In 2016, Haji Hayatullah dispatched an individual to Iraq to work with ISIS.

Haji Hayatullah has also provided support to the Taliban and served in multiple leadership roles for LT.  Over the past several years, Haji Hayatullah has also provided weapons to Taliban commanders.  In January 2010, Haji Hayatullah was part of a group of JDQ leaders who pledged JDQ's allegiance to the Taliban, vowing to conduct the Afghan insurgency under the Taliban's leadership.

He has served as a commander for LT in Afghanistan, and as of 2013, Haji Hayatullah oversaw the training of LT operatives.

Haji Hayatullah has also provided material and financial support to al-Qa'ida militants, members, and senior leaders since at least 2011.  In 2014, Haji Hayatullah planned to provide funding to al-Qa'ida members under the cover of charity projects.  In mid-2011, Haji Hayatullah provided support to al-Qa'ida militants associated with Nayf Salam Muhammad Ujaym al-Hababi, who was designated by OFAC on February 10, 2016, for acting for or on behalf of al-Qa'ida.

### Ali Muhammad Abu Turab

OFAC designated Ali Muhammad Abu Turab for providing material and financial support to JDQ and Fazeel-A-Tul Shaykh Abu Mohammed Ameen Al-Peshawari, also known as Shaykh Aminullah. Shaykh Aminullah was designated by both the United States and the United Nations (UN) in 2009 for providing material support to al-Qa'ida and LT.

As of 2016, Abu Turab was a JDQ facilitator working to provide thousands of dollars to Pakistan-based JDQ leadership, including Inayat ur Rahman.  Also during 2016, Abu Turab facilitated the movement of tens of thousands of dollars from the Gulf to Pakistan.  In 2015, Abu Turab supported JDQ leadership by coordinating assistance for Haji Hayatullah and facilitating JDQ's fundraising efforts in the Gulf.

Abu Turab has also regularly facilitated LT's fundraising efforts in the Gulf by introducing LT fundraisers to donors.  The donations were used by the Taliban to recruit and train fighters who were sent to fight in Afghanistan.  As of 2007, Abu Turab had also facilitated the establishment of LT training camps in collaboration with Abdul Aziz Nuristani, who was designated by OFAC on March 31, 2016 for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial and other services to or in support of, al-Qaida, the Taliban, and LT.  At least one of the LT camps was used for training on improvised explosive devices, suicide vests manufacturing, and the use of heavy weapons.

Abu Turab has also been involved in the training and facilitation of extremists to Afghanistan.  In 2014, Abu Turab facilitated Shaykh Aminullah's travel between Pakistan and the Gulf.

### Inayat ur Rahman

OFAC designated Inayat ur Rahman for acting for or on behalf of JDQ and the Taliban, and for providing material and financial support to LT and the Taliban.

Inayat ur Rahman is a long-time leader of JDQ, and as of late 2014, worked directly for Haji Hayatullah.  As of mid-2015, Inayat ur Rahman managed JDQ's day-to-day operations.

As of 2015, Inayat ur Rahman was interested in expanding extremists' influence in northeastern Afghanistan.  He also provided training to militants on the merits of conducting jihad against the Afghan Government.  As of 2013, Inayat ur Rahman was working to obtain funding for militant groups in eastern Afghanistan.

As of 2014, Inayat ur Rahman also provided financial support, weapons, and transportation to LT, as well as funded three LT training centers.  At that time, JDQ and LT closely coordinated militant activities in Kunar Province, Afghanistan.  In June 2013, Inayat ur Rahman facilitated the transfer of weapons from LT's head of Afghan operations, Abdullah Mujahid, to 25 LT operatives to be used for an attack against a rival militant commander.  Abdullah Mujahid was designated by OFAC on August 30, 2012, based on his leadership position with LT.  Inayat ur Rahman also allowed his office to be used by LT to train fighters.

As of December 2010, Inayat ur Rahman was an important LT figure who, along with Shaykh Aminullah and Abdul Aziz Nuristani, was recruiting madrassa students in the Peshawar area to become LT fighters.  Nuristani was designated by OFAC on March 31, 2016, for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or financial and other services to or in support of, al-Qa'ida, the Taliban, and LT.

Inayat ur Rahman has also provided support to the Taliban.  As of 2014, Inayat ur Rahman was a military leader in the Taliban leadership council in Peshawar, Pakistan.  In July 2012, along with Shaykh Aminullah, Abdul Aziz Nuristani, and other militants, Inayat ur Rahman came to an agreement with al-Qa'ida and LT members to provide weapons, ammunition, and financial support to the Taliban and discussed how to improve Taliban tactics against Coalition forces.  Inayat ur Rahman pledged allegiance to the Taliban and vowed to conduct the Afghan insurgency under the Taliban's leadership in January 2010.

Inayat ur Rahman has actively supported ISIS – Khorasan.

As of 2012, Inayat ur Rahman's militant forces were allied with al-Qa'ida.** **

### Welfare and Development Organization of Jamaat-Ud-Dawah for Qur'an and Sunnah

OFAC designated the Welfare and Development Organization of Jamaat-Ud-Dawah for Qur'an and Sunnah (WDO) for being controlled by Inayat ur Rahman.  As of 2015, Inayat ur Rahman was the director, chairman, and president of WDO, and he has been a leader of WDO since 2004.  OFAC designated Inayat ur Rahman today for acting for or on behalf of JDQ and the Taliban, and for providing material and financial support to LT and the Taliban.

WDO ostensibly collects money for charity, but in reality funds insurgent activities.  WDO was used to collect intelligence and conduct logistical work in support of Afghan militant operations.  For a number of years, Afghan insurgents have received regular funding through WDO from organizations, including NGOs, in Gulf countries.  Some Afghan insurgent leaders have also been members of WDO.

[Identifying information on the individuals and entity designated today](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20170511.aspx)*. *

####
