---
title: Report on Foreign Portfolio Holdings on U.S. Securites at End-June 2016
date: 2017-04-28T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0066
url: /news/press-releases/sm0066
---
*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** - The final results from the annual survey of foreign portfolio holdings of U.S. securities at the end of June 2016 were released today on the Treasury website at [https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/Pages/fpis.aspx](https://home.treasury.gov/data/treasury-international-capital-tic-system-home-page/tic-forms-instructions/securities-c-annual-cross-us-border-portfolio-holdings). The survey was undertaken jointly by Treasury, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The next survey will cover holdings at the end of June 2017; preliminary data are expected to be released by February 28, 2018.   Complementary surveys measuring U.S. holdings of foreign securities are also carried out annually. Data from the most recent survey, reporting on securities held at year-end 2016, are currently being processed. Preliminary results are expected to be reported by August 31, 2017.   The survey measured the value of foreign portfolio holdings of U.S. securities as of June 30, 2016, to be $17,139 billion, with $6,186 billion held in U.S. equities, $10,144 billion in U.S. long-term debt securities [/1] (of which $1,187 billion are holdings of asset-backed securities (ABS) [/2] and $8,957 billion are holdings of non-ABS securities), and $909 billion held in U.S. short-term debt securities. The previous survey, conducted as of June 30, 2015, measured the value of total foreign holdings of U.S. securities at $17,134 billion, with holdings of $6,655 billion in U.S. equities, $9,547 billion in U.S. long-term debt securities, and $932 billion in U.S. short-term debt securities (see Table A).   [/1] Long-term debt securities have an *original* term-to-maturity of over one year. [/2] Asset-backed securities are backed by pools of assets, such as pools of residential home mortgages or credit card receivables, which give the security owners claims against the cash flows generated by the underlying assets. Unlike most other debt securities, these securities generally repay both principal and interest on a regular basis, reducing the principal outstanding with each payment cycle.   [2016 End June Report](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/shl2016_final_20170421.pdf)
    **Table A.  Foreign holdings of U.S. securities,  by type of security, as of selected survey dates** (Billions of dollars) June 30, 2015 June 30, 2016 Long-term securities 16,202 16,230 Equities 6,655 6,186 Long-term debt 9,547 10,044 Asset-backed 1,154 1,187 Other 8,393 8,957 Short-term debt securities 932 909**Total 17,134 17,139**Of which: Official 5,794 5,504
