---
title: Unified Framework for Fixing Our Broken Tax Code
date: 2017-09-27T11:20:06-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0166
url: /news/press-releases/sm0166
---
**Washington -** The Trump Administration, the House Committee on Ways and Means, and the Senate Committee on Finance have developed a unified framework to achieve pro-American, fiscally-responsible tax reform. This framework will deliver a 21st century tax code that is built for growth, supports middle-class families, defends our workers, protects our jobs, and puts America first. It will deliver fiscally responsible tax reform by broadening the tax base, closing loopholes and growing the economy.
 
“This unified framework is the foundation Congress will use to craft legislation around middle-income tax cuts, a simpler and fairer tax code, and the most competitive business tax rates, so American companies of all sizes can create jobs, give their workers a pay raise, and grow the economy,” said Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin.  He added, “President Trump will continue his leadership in support of achieving the goals of this framework by traveling around the country speaking directly to the American people.  We will work with Congress to seize this opportunity to level the playing field for American workers and bring tax relief to middle income families and small businesses who need it most.”
 
This unified framework serves as a template for the tax-writing committees that will develop legislation through a transparent and inclusive committee process. The committees will also develop additional reforms to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of tax laws and to effectuate the goals of the framework.  The Chairmen welcome and encourage bipartisan support and participation in the process.
 

[The full framework](https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Documents/Tax-Framework.pdf), and a [one page overview](https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Documents/Tax-Framework_1pager.pdf). 
 
###
