---
title: Secretary Mnuchin Announces Intention to Appoint First Deputy Comptroller of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
date: 2017-05-03T08:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0072
url: /news/press-release/sm0072
---
**Washington** – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin today announced his intention to appoint Keith Noreika as a Deputy Comptroller and designate him the First Deputy Comptroller of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC).  Mr. Noreika will serve as Acting Comptroller upon the departure of OCC Comptroller Thomas J. Curry. With nearly 20 years of experience, Mr. Noreika is a leading expert in the regulation and supervision of national banks and federal savings associations. 
 
“Keith Noreika has deep experience in helping banks operate in a safe and sound manner, provide fair access to financial services, and provide credit needed for business expansion and job growth,” said Secretary Mnuchin. “I am confident that he will capably lead the OCC in carrying out its important mission.”
 
Mr. Curry assumed the office of Comptroller on April 9, 2012. His five-year term concluded on April 9, 2017, and he has been serving under an extension since that time. Mr. Noreika’s position will become effective on May 5, 2017, when Mr. Curry completes his tenure at the OCC.
 
Secretary Mnuchin also expressed his appreciation for the leadership and service of Comptroller Curry. “Under Comptroller Curry’s stewardship, the OCC has effectively worked to advance its mission to ensure that national banks and federal savings associations operate in a safe and sound manner,” said Secretary Mnuchin. “I congratulate and thank him for his commitment to public service.” 
 
The OCC is a bureau within the Department of the Treasury, and the Comptroller of the Currency is appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate. By statute (12 U.S.C. § 4), the Treasury Secretary is responsible for appointing up to four Deputy Comptrollers of the Currency and designating one as the First Deputy Comptroller. During a vacancy in the position of Comptroller, the First Deputy Comptroller possesses the powers and performs the duties of the office of Comptroller.
 
Keith Noreika will serve as First Deputy Comptroller of the Currency.  He obtained his undergraduate degree from the University of Pennsylvania in 1994 and his law degree from Harvard Law School in 1997, where he served as an editor of the Harvard Law Review. Mr. Noreika was a law clerk for the Hon. Jerry E. Smith of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. He has represented clients, including banks of all sizes, in regulatory matters, enforcement actions, litigation, and corporate transactions before the various federal and state banking agencies. Mr. Noreika began his career at Covington & Burling LLP where he was an associate and later a partner. Most recently, Mr. Noreika was a partner at Simpson Thacher & Bartlett LLP where he was head of the firm’s Financial Institutions Regulatory Practice. Mr. Noreika has also taught banking law at the University of Virginia School of Law and the University of Pennsylvania School of Law.
 
####
