---
title:  Treasury Targets al-Qa’ida in the Arabian Peninsula
date: 2017-05-19
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0091
url: /news/press-releases/sm0091
---
​*(Archived Content)*

*Action targets Yemen-based AQAP leaders and facilitators*
* *
**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) took action today targeting al-Qa’ida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) leaders and facilitators by imposing sanctions on two individuals.  Specifically, OFAC designated Hashim Muhsin Aydarus al-Hamid (al-Hamid) and Khalid Ali Mabkhut al-Aradah (al-Aradah), both Yemen-based tribal leaders who facilitated the transfer of weapons and money and the movement of individuals in support of AQAP.  AQAP poses a direct security threat to the interests of the United States and the international community, and today’s action emphasizes the United States’ ongoing efforts to combat terrorism worldwide.
 
Today's actions were taken in conjunction with the State Department's designation of Hashem Safieddine, a senior leader in Hizballah, and Muhammad al-Isawi, the leader of ISIS - Sinai. 
 
These actions were taken pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of these persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are blocked, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them. 
 
“These sanctions seek to disrupt the financial support networks of al-Qa’ida terrorist leaders based in Yemen who facilitate financial support and provide weapons to AQAP in support of violent insurgent operations,” said OFAC Director John E. Smith.  “The United States continues to aggressively target extremists and tribal leaders in Yemen and the surrounding region who are a direct threat to the security of the United States, Yemen, and the international community.”
 
**Hashim Muhsin Aydarus al-Hamid** OFAC designated al-Hamid for acting for or on behalf of AQAP as well as for providing material and financial support to AQAP.
 
Al-Hamid is a tribal leader in Yemen.  He regularly acted as an AQAP facilitator by assisting in the provision of weapons and money for AQAP.  In this role, al-Hamid facilitated the transfer of explosives and weapons for AQAP attacks, to include the purchase and delivery of weapons to AQAP forces.  Additionally, he facilitated the movement of weapons and people into Yemen.
 
**Khalid Ali Mabkhut al-Aradah** OFAC designated al-Aradah for acting for or on behalf of AQAP as well as for providing material and financial support to AQAP. 
 
Al-Aradah is a tribal sheikh and senior AQAP official in Yemen who facilitates financial support to AQAP, to include support to AQAP leadership.  He is a leader of an AQAP camp who received cash payments from AQAP in exchange for logistical support. Additionally, al-Aradah provided weapons and fighters to AQAP.  As an AQAP operative, al-Aradah transported weapons and AQAP recruits.
 
[For identifying information on the individuals designated today, click here*.*](www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20170519.aspx)
 
*###*
