---
title: Secretary Mnuchin Travels to California to Discuss Tax Reform with Business Leaders, Hardworking Americans
date: 2017-11-01T10:29:49-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0203
url: /news/press-releases/sm0203
---
**Washington** – U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin is in California this week meeting with local business leaders and hardworking Americans on the importance of tax reform.

"Delivering tax reform to middle income Americans is my top priority. With President Trump in Asia, my colleagues in the Cabinet and I are traveling across the country to ensure we carry his voice and message to the American people who deserve to keep more of their hard-earned dollars," said Secretary Mnuchin.

While in California, Secretary Mnuchin will deliver remarks and engage in a moderated discussion at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in recognition of President Reagan's historic tax cuts 31 years ago. Secretary Mnuchin will also deliver remarks at the Los Angeles Convention Center before the International Franchise Association's Franchise Expo West, which brings together thousands of entrepreneurs and future business owners. He will also meet with local business leaders in Corona and Newport Beach to discuss how the tax relief plan will help their companies.

"We need to grow the economy and create jobs – the way to get that done is to deliver meaningful tax cuts and simplify the tax code. I am looking forward to my discussions with hardworking Californians about how their families and businesses will benefit from our plan," said Mnuchin.

[A full list of the Secretary's events](https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/daily-guidance/Pages/11012017.aspx).

####
