---
title: Treasury Designates Company in Turkey for Attempting To Trade Arms and Luxury Goods with North Korea
date: 2018-10-04T10:25:13-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM503
url: /news/press-releases/sm503
---
**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today announced North Korea-related designations, continuing the implementation of existing UN and U.S. sanctions.  Today’s action against one entity and three individuals designates a company in Turkey for its attempts to circumvent sanctions on goods that have long been prohibited by UN Security Council (UNSC) resolutions.  This action reinforces the United States’ ongoing commitment to implement decisions of the UNSC.

“SIA Falcon International Group and individuals acting on its behalf are blatantly attempting to flout longstanding UN sanctions on trade in weapons and luxury goods with North Korea.  The international community must not stand idly by as UN sanctions are being circumvented,” said Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin.  “The United States is deeply committed to the final, fully verified denuclearization of North Korea, and will continue to enforce and implement sanctions until that time.”

OFAC designated Turkey-based **SIA Falcon International Group**(**SIA Falcon**) pursuant to E.O. 13551 for having attempted to have directly or indirectly imported, exported, or reexported any arms or related materiel and luxury goods to, into, or from North Korea.**SIA Falcon**is involved in weapons and luxury goods trade with North Korea, although it purports to operate in various other sectors and geographies, including defense, transportation, logistics, and management and investment consulting.  It also operates a branch office in Latvia.  OFAC also designated**Huseyin Sahin**and**Erhan Culha**for having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly**SIA Falcon**.**Huseyin Sahin**is the Chief Executive Officer of**SIA Falcon**, holds 100 percent of the voting capital, and is a member of its board of directors.**Erhan Culha**is a general manager of**SIA Falcon**.

OFAC also designated **Ri Song Un**, the economic and commercial counselor at the North Korean embassy in Mongolia.**Ri Song Un**was designated pursuant to E.O. 13687 for being an official of the Government of North Korea.  Earlier in 2018,**SIA Falcon**officials hosted**Ri Song Un**in Turkey to negotiate trade deals involving weapons and luxury goods.

As a result of today’s action, any property or interests in property of the designated persons in the possession or control of U.S. persons or within the United States must be blocked, and U.S. persons generally are prohibited from dealing with any of the designated persons.

[Identifying information on the individuals and entity sanctioned today](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20181004.aspx).

####
