---
title: "Secretary Mnuchin to Attend Counter-Terrorist Financing Conference in Paris"
date: 2018-04-26
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/sm0370
press_release_number: SM0370
---

Washington – The U.S. Treasury Department today announced that Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin will travel to Paris, France on April 26 – 27 to attend a counter-terrorist financing conference hosted by the Government of France.
Secretary Mnuchin will deliver remarks at a ministerial roundtable chaired by France’s Minister for the Economy and Finance Bruno Le Maire. The roundtable will focus on new and emerging technologies and methods that terrorists are using to raise, move, and store money.
“I applaud President Macron and Minister Le Maire for bringing us together on this critical topic. I am optimistic that the discussions over the coming days will mobilize new efforts in the fight against terrorism,” said Secretary Mnuchin.
The conference will bring together approximately 70 countries committed to fighting terrorist financing, including members of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and FATF-style regional bodies. Representatives from the International Monetary Fund, Interpol, United Nations, World Bank, and other organizations will also attend.
While in Paris, Secretary Mnuchin will also meet with U.S. and French business leaders to discuss the importance of engaging and sharing information with the private sector to magnify these actions. He will also attend additional working sessions and meetings with his finance ministry counterparts and other financial leaders.
Secretary Mnuchin will be joined by Sigal Mandelker, Treasury Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence, Jennifer Fowler, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes, and Ken Blanco, Director of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, as well as other U.S. Government officials.
####
