---
title: Treasury Targets Russian Bank and Other Facilitators of North Korean United Nations Security Council Violations
date: 2018-08-03
draft: false
press_release_number: SM454
url: /news/press-releases/sm454
---
**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today announced additional sanctions related to North Korea, continuing the enforcement of existing UN and U.S. sanctions.  Today’s action targets a Russian bank for knowingly facilitating a significant transaction on behalf of an individual designated for weapons of mass destruction-related activities in connection with North Korea.  OFAC also targeted one individual and two entities for facilitating North Korean illicit financial activity.  This action reinforces the United States’ ongoing commitments to upholding the decisions of the UN Security Council (UNSC).

“The United States will continue to enforce UN and U.S. sanctions and shut down illicit revenue streams to North Korea.  Our sanctions will remain in place until we have achieved the final, fully-verified denuclearization of North Korea,” said Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin.

As a result of today’s action, any property or interests in property of the designated persons in the possession or control of U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States is blocked, and U.S. persons generally are prohibited from dealing with any of the designated persons.

### Financial and Foreign Trade Bank-Affiliated Targets

OFAC, pursuant to Section 4 of Executive Order (E.O.) 13810, today sanctioned Russian-registered **Agrosoyuz Commercial Bank (Agrosoyuz)**for knowingly conducting or facilitating a significant transaction on behalf of Han Jang Su, the Moscow-based chief representative of Foreign Trade Bank (FTB), North Korea’s primary foreign exchange bank.  Pursuant to E.O. 13687, OFAC today designated**Ri Jong Won**, the Moscow-based deputy representative of FTB.  Both Han Jang Su and FTB were already designated by the United States under E.O. 13382 and by the UNSC Committee established pursuant to Resolution 1718 (2006).  OFAC designated Han Jang Su on March 31, 2017, for acting for or on behalf of FTB, an entity designated pursuant to E.O.s 13382 and 13722.  On August 5, 2017, Han Jang Su was designated at the UN.  According to UNSC Resolution 2321 (2016), if a Member State determines that an individual is working on behalf of or at the direction of a DPRK bank or financial institution, Member States shall expel the individual from their territories.  Therefore, Han Jang Su and**Ri Jong Won**should be expelled from Russia.  Nevertheless, continuing into 2018, Russian bank**Agrosoyuz**continued to provide services to Han Jang Su, in violation of Russia’s UN obligations.**Agrosoyuz**also knowingly opened multiple bank accounts for at least three FTB front companies.**Ri Jong Won**also held Russian bank accounts in his name at least as of late 2016.

In addition to **Agrosoyuz**and**Ri Jong Won**, OFAC designated two associated FTB front companies —**Dandong Zhongsheng Industry & Trade Co., Ltd. (Zhongsheng)**, pursuant to E.O. 13382, and**Korea Ungum Corporation (Ungum)**, pursuant to E.O. 13722.**Agrosoyuz**and North Korea have a long relationship:  from 2009 to 2013,**Agrosoyuz**processed millions of dollars in transactions through accounts owned by North Korean commercial banks.  In mid-2013,**Agrosoyuz**transferred more than $5.5 million on behalf of the now UN- and U.S.-designated Korea United Development Bank (KUDB).  In 2014,**Agrosoyuz**and other Russian banks arranged to move KUDB funds.  As of mid-2016,**Agrosoyuz**had opened new accounts for a North Korean front company, and it processed over $8 million and held the equivalent of over $3 million on behalf of KUDB.  In 2017, Han Jang Su opened bank accounts for**Zhongsheng**at**Agrosoyuz**.  In addition, as of early 2018, Agrosoyuz allowed a North Korean front company to invest almost $2.5 million in Russian rubles into an account with**Agrosoyuz**.

Today’s action, taken pursuant to Section 4 of E.O. 13810 of September 20, 2017, blocks all property and interests in property of **Agrosoyuz**that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of any U.S. person, and provides that such property and interests in property may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in.

[Identifying information on the individual and entities designated today.](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20180803.aspx)

####
