---
title: Treasury Sanctions South Asian Terrorist Facilitators
date: 2018-02-07T09:09:26-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0282
url: /news/press-release/sm0282
---
*Designations Continue to Pressure and Expose Operatives in Radical Terrorist Organizations*

 

**Washington** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) took action today to disrupt South Asian terrorist support networks by designating three individuals, Rahman Zeb Faqir Muhammad, Hizb Ullah Astam Khan, and Dilawar Khan Nadir Khan, as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  As a result of today’s designation, all property and interests in property of these persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are blocked, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.

“Treasury continues to aggressively pursue and expose radicals who support terrorist organizations and run illicit financial networks across South Asia.  We are targeting operatives who have provided logistical support, improvised explosive devices, and other technological assistance to Al-Qa’ida, Lashkar-e Tayyiba, the Taliban, and other terrorist groups,” said Sigal Mandelker, Treasury Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.  “This is part of this Administration’s broader efforts to disrupt terrorist fundraising, and we call on the Pakistani government and others in the region to work with us to deny sanctuary to these dangerous individuals and organizations.”

### Rahman Zeb Faqir Muhammad

Rahman Zeb Faqir Muhammad (Rahman Zeb) was designated for providing financial, material, or technological support for, or other services to or in support of, Lashkar-e Tayyiba (LeT), a UN- and U.S.-designated terrorist organization based in Pakistan.

Rahman Zeb was an LeT operative who for several years was responsible for collecting funds and running a network for LeT in the Gulf.  In early 2016, he coordinated funds transfers with a Pakistan-based LeT facilitator.  As of mid-2014, he was a long-standing contact of LeT members involved in Afghan operations, and he was involved in business activities with an LeT commander responsible for the group’s operations in Afghanistan.

Additionally, in mid-2014, Rahman Zeb facilitated travel for Fazeel-A-Tul Shaykh Abu Mohammed Ameen Al-Peshwari (aka Shaykh Aminullah) from Pakistan to the Gulf.   OFAC designated Shaykh Aminullah in July 2009 for providing material support to Al-Qa’ida, LeT, and the Taliban.

 

### Hizb Ullah Astam Khan

Hizb Ullah Astam Khan (Hizb Ullah) was designated for acting for or on behalf of SDGT Shaykh Aminullah.

As of 2016, Hizb Ullah facilitated support for Shaykh Aminullah and served as a financial official of a Peshawar-based madrassa that was co-founded by Shaykh Aminullah.  As of early 2015, Hizb Ullah provided assistance to Shaykh Aminullah during Shaykh Aminullah’s travel in the Gulf.  Hizb Ullah also facilitated Shaykh Aminullah’s travel in 2013 to the Gulf.

Hizb Ullah previously worked for Shaykh Aminullah as an improvised explosive device (IED) expert in Kunar Province, Afghanistan, where he deployed IEDs targeting Afghan and Coalition forces.  During that time, Hizb Ullah was involved with shipments of IED precursor chemicals supplied from Pakistan to Afghanistan for U.S.-designated terrorist groups, including the Taliban and Jama’at ul Dawa al-Qu’ran (JDQ).

 

### Dilawar Khan Nadir Khan

Dilawar Khan Nadir Khan (Dilawar) also was designated for acting for or on behalf of Shaykh Aminullah.

Dilawar has acted as Shaykh Aminullah’s assistant to include being responsible for handling Aminullah’s accommodations in Pakistan and relaying Aminullah’s messages.  Dilawar has also facilitated funds transfers, including international transactions, on behalf of Shaykh Aminullah.  In 2014, Dilawar facilitated travel for Aminullah within Pakistan, as well as to the Gulf.  In 2013, Dilawar was one of the leaders of the Ganj Madrassa, which OFAC designated in August 2013 for being controlled by Shaykh Aminullah and for providing financial and material support to LeT and the Taliban.

[Identifying information on the individuals designated today](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20180207.aspx).

####
