---
title: Treasury Issues Sanctions Against Lashkar-E Tayyiba Financial Facilitators
date: 2018-07-31
draft: false
press_release_number: SM448
url: /news/press-releases/sm448
---
*Designations Continue to Pressure and Expose Terrorist Fundraising and Support Networks *

**WASHINGTON**– The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) took action today to disrupt Lashkar-e Tayyiba’s (LeT) fundraising and support networks by designating two of the group’s financial facilitators, Hameed ul Hassan (Hassan) and Abdul Jabbar (Jabbar), as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224.  OFAC is designating Hassan and Jabbar for acting for or on behalf of Lashkar-e Tayyiba, a terrorist organization based in Pakistan.

“These Lashkar-e Tayyiba financial facilitators are responsible for collecting, transporting and distributing funds to support this terrorist group and provide salaries to extremists,” said Sigal Mandelker, Treasury Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.  “Treasury’s designations not only aim to expose and shut down Lashkar-e Tayyiba’s financial network, but also to curtail its ability to raise funds to carry out violent terrorist attacks.”

All property and interests in property of Hassan and Jabbar subject to U.S. jurisdiction are now blocked, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.

**Hameed ul Hassan**

Hassan is a financial facilitator for LeT.  As of late 2016, Hassan worked with Falah-e Insaniat Foundation, an alias of LeT, to collect and send funds to individuals in Syria.  Further, as of early 2016, Hassan worked with his brother, Muhammad Ijaz Safarash, and Khalid Walid to transport funds to Pakistan on behalf of LeT.  OFAC previously designated Safarash and Walid as SDGTs for their association with LeT in March 2016 and September 2012, respectively.  Additionally, Hassan has an active Twitter account, which identifies him as a leader of Jamaat-ud Dawah (an alias of LeT).

**Abdul Jabbar**

Jabbar is a financial facilitator for LeT and distributes salaries for the terrorist group.  Jabbar has worked in LeT’s finance department since around 2000.  Additionally, as of mid-2016, Jabbar distributed funds on behalf of the Falah-e Insaniat Foundation, an alias of LeT.

In December 2001, the Department of State designated LeT as a Foreign Terrorist Organization in accordance with section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended, and as an SDGT pursuant to E.O. 13224.  LeT was also added to the UN Security Council’s 1267/1989 Sanctions List in May 2005.

Jamaat-ud Dawa was designated as an alias of LeT pursuant to E.O. 13224 in April 2006 and was added to the UN Security Council’s 1267/1989 Sanctions List in December 2008.  In November 2010, the Department of State amended its designations of LeT to include the alias Falah-e Insaniat Foundation.  And in March 2012, the UN amended its Sanctions List to recognize the Falah-e Insaniat Foundation as a front for LeT.

[For identifying information on the individuals designated today](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20180731.aspx).

####
