---
title: Treasury Targets Terrorist Group Lashkar-e Tayyiba’s Political Party
date: 2018-04-02
draft: false
press_release_number: SM0335
url: /news/press-releases/sm0335
---
**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), in concert with the Department of State, took action today targeting Lashkar-e Tayyiba (LeT) and its political party, the Milli Muslim League (MML), by designating MML and seven MML officials as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  Specifically, OFAC designated seven members of the MML central leadership body, Saifullah Khalid, Muzammil Iqbal Hashimi, Muhammad Harris Dar, Tabish Qayyum, Fayyaz Ahmad, Faisal Nadeem, and Muhammad Ehsan, for acting for on behalf of LeT, a Pakistan-based terrorist group designated in December 2001.  The Department of State today amended the designation of LeT to add the alias MML, as well as another alias, Tehreek-e-Azadi-e-Kashmir (TaK).

As a result of today’s designations, all property and interests in property of these persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are blocked, and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them.

“Treasury is targeting the Milli Muslim League and a group of seven global terrorists who are complicit in Lashkar-e Tayyiba’s attempts to undermine Pakistan’s political process,” said Treasury Under Secretary Sigal Mandelker.  “The Milli Muslim League is not a recognized political party; further it relies on the leadership of Lashkar-e Tayyiba for guidance and direction.  We will continue to target terrorist organizations like Lashkar-e Tayyiba, even when they attempt to cloak themselves as political parties or hide their extremism behind other facades.  Those working with the Milli Muslim League, including providing financial donations, should think twice about doing so or risk exposure to U.S. sanctions.”

**Saifullah Khalid**Saifullah Khalid (Khalid) was designated for acting for or on behalf of LeT.

Khalid was introduced as the President of the MML and spoke about the party’s formation, aims, and objectives, during an August 8, 2017 press conference.

Khalid is also the head of LeT’s Peshawar headquarters, and served on Jamaat-ud Dawa (JuD)’s Coordination Committee for Central Punjab Province.  JuD was designated by the Department of State as an alias of LeT pursuant to E.O. 13224 in April 2016, and was added to the United Nations 1267/1988 Sanctions list as an alias of LeT in December 2008.

**Muzammil Iqbal Hashimi**Muzammil Iqbal Hashimi (Hashimi) was designated for acting for or on behalf of LeT.

Hashimi is the Vice President of the MML, and during an August 8, 2017 press conference, was introduced as a member of the MML’s Central Body Leadership.  He is JuD’s chief for Karachi, a role he has held since at least 2014.  Hashimi is also the former LeT zone commander for Karachi.

**Muhammad Harris Dar**Muhammad Harris Dar (Dar) was designated for acting for or on behalf of LeT.

Dar is the Joint Secretary of the MML, and formerly an officer in LeT’s student wing, the Al-Muhammadiya Students (AMS), which the Department of State added as an alias of LeT in December 2016 pursuant to E.O. 13224.

As of early 2016, Dar provided first aid and firefighting instruction at an LeT training camp.  This camp also included training on weapon skills and assault tactics.

**Tabish Qayyum**Tabish Qayyum (Qayyum) was designated for acting for or on behalf of LeT.

Qayyum is the Information Secretary for the MML, and during an August 8, 2017 press conference, was introduced as a member of the MML’s Central Body Leadership.

Additionally, Qayyum is an assistant of Yahya Mujahid (Mujahid), JuD’s spokesperson, whom the UN and OFAC designated in June and July 2009, respectively.  Mujahid served as the head of LeT’s media department and as an LeT spokesperson for a number of years.

**Fayyaz Ahmad**Fayyaz Ahmad (Ahmad) was designated for acting for or on behalf of LeT.

Ahmad is the General Secretary of the MML, and was introduced as a member of the MML’s Central Body Leadership during an August 8, 2017 press conference.  Ahmad is also the former JuD Zone commander for Faisalabad and the zone’s current JUD administrator.

**Faisal Nadeem**Faisal Nadeem (Nadeem) was designated for acting for or on behalf of LeT.

Nadeem is the Broadcast and Publications Secretary of the MML, as well as JuD’s representative in Hyderabad.  In mid-2017, Nadeem served as LeT’s head for Sindh Province, as well as JuD’s administrator for interior Sindh.

**Muhammad Ehsan**Muhammad Ehsan (Ehsan) was designated for acting for or on behalf of LeT.

Ehsan is the Finance Secretary for the MML as well as JuD’s leader for Gujranwala.   He has also served as a spokesman for the MML.

 

For identifying information on the individuals and entity designated today, click[here](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20180402.aspx).

 

####
