---
title: Treasury Targets Al-Qa’ida in Mali
date: 2019-07-16T10:30:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM730
url: /news/press-releases/sm730
---
WASHINGTON – The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), in concert with the Department of State, took action today targeting Jama’at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin (JNIM), a west African terrorist group designated in September 2018, by designating a JNIM leader as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.  Specifically, OFAC designated Bah Ag Moussa for acting for or on behalf of JNIM.  OFAC also designated Bah Ag Moussa for acting for or on behalf of JNIM leader, Iyad ag Ghali, who was designated pursuant to E.O. 13224 in February 2013. The Department of State today also designated Ali Maychou as an SDGT pursuant to E.O. 13224.

“Treasury is targeting the leadership of JNIM, al-Qa’ida’s branch in Mali, for its destabilizing role conducting terrorist attacks across the country,” said Treasury Under Secretary Sigal Mandelker. “As a leader within JNIM, Bah Ag Moussa directly contributes to the violence and instability fueled by al-Qa’ida’s terrorism.  This Administration will relentlessly target terrorist organizations like JNIM, and all who support them expose themselves to significant sanctions risk.”

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of these persons, and of any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by the designated persons, that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC.  OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all dealings by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of blocked or designated persons.

### Bah Ag Moussa

Bah Ag Moussa (Moussa) was designated for acting for or on behalf of JNIM and Iyad ag Ghali.

In March 2019, Moussa led a terrorist operation against a Malian Armed Forces base in Dioura, Mali that killed at least 21 Malian soldiers.  Moussa is a close associate of Iyad ag Ghali, a United States and United Nations sanctioned terrorist and the head of JNIM.  Moussa is a former Colonel who deserted the Malian Army to join armed terrorist groups, and is responsible for leading attacks in several other localities in northern Mali.

[Identifying information on the individuals and entity designated today](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20190716.aspx).

####
