---
title: Treasury Designates Turkish Ministries and Senior Officials in Response to Military Action in Syria
date: 2019-10-14T12:49:36-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM792
url: /news/press-releases/sm792
---
*Two Ministries and Three Ministers Designated with
New Executive Order*

**Washington** – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) took action against two ministries and three senior Turkish Government officials in response to Turkey’s military operations in Syria.  The Turkish Government’s actions are endangering innocent civilians, and destabilizing the region, including undermining the campaign to defeat ISIS.  The Government of Turkey’s Ministry of National Defence and the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, as well as the Minister of National Defence, Minister of Energy and Natural Resources, and the Minister of the Interior are blocked as a result of today’s action.  The designation of these ministries and officials is a result of the Turkish Government’s actions that further deteriorate peace, security, and stability of the region.  We are prepared to impose additional sanctions on Government of Turkey officials and entities, as necessary.

“The United States is holding the Turkish Government accountable for escalating violence by Turkish forces, endangering innocent civilians, and destabilizing the region,” said Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin.

In addition, persons that engage in certain transactions with persons designated today may themselves be exposed to designation.  Furthermore, any foreign financial institution that knowingly facilitates any significant financial transactions for or on behalf of the persons designated today could be subject to U.S. correspondent or payable through account sanctions.

Today’s actions are not intended to affect or disrupt the operation of international humanitarian NGOs or the United Nations in Turkey in rendering humanitarian assistance to Syrian communities in need.

OFAC is prepared to issue authorizations, such as general or specific licenses, as appropriate, to ensure that today’s action does not disrupt Turkey’s ability to meet its energy needs.

Additionally, OFAC issued three General Licenses simultaneously with today’s Executive Order.  General License 1 authorizes the conduct of the official business of the United States Government by employees, grantees, or contractors otherwise prohibited by the order.  General License 2 authorizes a 30 day wind down period for all transactions and activities that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the wind down operations, contracts, or other agreements involving the Ministries of National Defence or Energy and Natural Resources of the Government of Turkey.  General License 3 authorizes official activities of the United Nations involving the Ministry of National Defence or the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources of the Government of Turkey.

** Designation Bases and Authorities ** Republic of Turkey Ministry of National Defence is being designated pursuant to E.O. of October 14, 2019, for being a subdivision, agency, or instrumentality of the Government of Turkey.

Republic of Turkey Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources is being designated pursuant to E.O. of October 14, 2019, for being a subdivision, agency, or instrumentality of the Government of Turkey.

Hulusi Akar, the Minister of National Defence of the Republic of Turkey, is being designated pursuant to E.O. of October 14, 2019, for being a current or former official of the Government of Turkey.

Suleyman Soylu, the Minister of Interior of the Republic of Turkey, is being designated pursuant to E.O. of October 14, 2019, for being a current or former official of the Government of Turkey.Fatih Donmez, the Minister of Energy of the Republic of Turkey, is being designated pursuant to E.O. of October 14, 2019, for being a current or former official of the Government of Turkey.As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of these persons, and of any other persons blocked by operation of law, that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons must be blocked and reported to OFAC.  E.O. October 14, 2019, and OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all dealings by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interest in property of blocked persons.

[For identifying information on the individuals and entities designated today, click here.](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20191014.aspx)

 

####
