---
title: Treasury Announces Marketable Borrowing Estimates
date: 2019-07-29T15:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM743
url: /news/press-releases/sm743
---
[*Sources and Uses Table*](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/SourcesUsesJuly2019Public07-29-19.pdf)

**WASHINGTON** -- The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced its current estimates of privately-held net marketable borrowing[[1]](#_ftn1)for July – September 2019 and October – December 2019 quarters:

- During the July – September 2019 quarter, Treasury expects to borrow $433 billion in privately-held net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-September cash balance of $350 billion.  The borrowing estimate is $274 billion higher than announced in April 2019.  The increase in borrowing is primarily driven by changes in cash balance assumptions.[[2]](#_ftn2)
- During the October – December 2019 quarter, Treasury expects to borrow $381 billion in privately-held net marketable debt, assuming an end-of-December cash balance of $410 billion.

During the April – June 2019 quarter, Treasury borrowed $40 billion in privately-held net marketable debt and ended the quarter with a cash balance of $264 billion.  In April 2019, Treasury estimated privately-held net marketable borrowing of $30 billion and assumed an end-of-June cash balance of $270 billion.2  The change in borrowing resulted from lower net cash flows partially offset by the lower end-of-quarter cash balance.

Additional financing details relating to Treasury’s Quarterly Refunding will be released at 8:30 a.m. on Wednesday, July 31, 2019.

###

[[1]](file:///C:/Users/PresberryW/AppData/Local/Microsoft/Windows/INetCache/Content.Outlook/L292Y8OG/Final%20Marketable%20Borrowing%20Estimate%20July%202019%2007-29-19.doc#_ftnref1)Privately-held net marketable borrowing excludes rollovers (auction “add-ons”) of Treasury securities held in the Federal

Reserve’s System Open Market Account (SOMA), but includes financing required due to SOMA redemptions.

[[2]](file:///C:/Users/PresberryW/AppData/Local/Microsoft/Windows/INetCache/Content.Outlook/L292Y8OG/Final%20Marketable%20Borrowing%20Estimate%20July%202019%2007-29-19.doc#_ftnref2)The end-of-September and December cash balances are subject to enactment of a debt limit suspension or increase.
