---
title: "Statement by Secretary Mnuchin on the Confirmation of Dr. Heath Tarbert as Chairman of the CFTC"
date: 2019-06-05
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/sm702
press_release_number: SM702
---

Washington –
U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin issued the following statement today on Dr. Heath Tarbert’s confirmation as Chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC).  Tarbert currently serves as the Treasury Department’s Acting Under Secretary for International Affairs and, prior to that designation, served as the Treasury’s Assistant Secretary for International Markets.  Tarbert will begin his Chairmanship at the CFTC on July 15, 2019:
“I applaud the Senate for voting to confirm Heath Tarbert as the 14th Chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.  I am grateful to Heath for his service to the nation, and in particular his leadership at Treasury where he has worked to promote U.S. interests, financial stability, and economic growth with foreign governments and multilateral organizations.  Heath also led Treasury’s efforts with Congress to modernize the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS).  I look forward to working with Heath in his new capacity and know that he will advance CFTC’s efforts to foster transparent, competitive, and financially sound markets.
“I would also like to thank J. Christopher Giancarlo for his successful tenure as Chairman of the CFTC and wish him well.  It has been an honor to work with him on recommendations for moving our market structures into the 21st century.”
####
