---
title: Secretary Mnuchin Leads Trip to Switzerland, United Kingdom, and Poland
date: 2020-01-21
draft: false
press_release_number: SM883
url: /news/press-releases/sm883
---
**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced key engagements for Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin’s upcoming trip to Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and Poland. Secretary Mnuchin will lead the U.S. delegation, which includes Secretary of Commerce Wilbur Ross, Secretary of Labor Eugene Scalia, Secretary of Transportation Elaine Chao, United States Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer, and Advisor to the President Ivanka Trump, to participate in the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.

“As we enter a new decade, it is essential that we continue to strengthen our economies and stop the financing of terrorism around the world,” said Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin. “This trip will provide an opportunity to highlight the American model of growth and prosperity on the global stage.”

While at the World Economic Forum, Secretary Mnuchin will participate in several key WEF conversations, including “The Future of American Resilience,” “Private Roundtable on Digital Currency Governance,” “The Digital Future of Finance,” “The Future of Cities, Infrastructure, and Urban Services,” “Transatlantic Alliance: New Architecture for US-EU Alliance,” “Finding Resilience in a Global Economy with New Rules,” and “Global Economic Outlook.”

While in Davos, Secretary Mnuchin will also engage in a discussion with the Wall Street Journal’s executive Washington editor Gerald Seib at a Journal event.  He will also hold a press gaggle and other press availabilities in Davos.

Secretary Mnuchin will meet with financial leaders from France, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Qatar, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, and the United Kingdom. He will also participate in bilateral meetings with Swiss President Simonetta Sommaruga and Iraqi President Barham Salih.

While in London, Secretary Mnuchin will meet with U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer Sajid Javid to discuss post-Brexit priorities and other economic issues. On Saturday, January 25, Secretary Mnuchin will participate in a moderated discussion at the Chatham House to celebrate the centennial of the Georgetown Walsh School of Foreign Service.

The Secretary will travel to Krakow, Poland on Monday, January 27 to lead the U.S. delegation attending an event commemorating the 75th Anniversary of the Liberation of Auschwitz.  He will also participate in bilateral meetings with Polish President Andrzej Duda and Israeli President Reuven Rivlin.

*NOTE: Details are subject to change. Read the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Public Engagement Schedule**. *

**####**
