---
title: Statement by Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin on Essential Financial Services Workers
date: 2020-03-24
draft: false
press_release_number: SM956
url: /news/press-releases/sm956
---
WASHINGTON—*U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin issued the following statement on Financial Services Sector Essential Critical Infrastructure Workers:*“I strongly support the Department of Homeland Security’s recent guidance identifying financial services sector workers as essential critical infrastructure workers during the COVID-19 response emergency.  The guidance provides information to State and local officials, as they work to protect their communities, to ensure the continuity of functions that are critical to public health and safety, as well as economic and national security.  Consistent with the President’s guidelines, ‘*if you work in a critical infrastructure sector, as defined by the Department of Homeland Security, you have a special responsibility to maintain your normal work schedule*.’

“The financial services sector is identified as a Critical Infrastructure Sector by the Department of Homeland Security.  The Essential Critical Infrastructure Workforce for the financial services sector includes workers who are needed to process (and maintain systems for processing) financial transactions and services, such as payment, clearing, and settlement services, wholesale funding, insurance services, and capital markets activities.  Essential financial services workers provide consumer access to banking and lending services, including ATMs and the movement of currency (e.g., armored cash carriers).  They support financial operations, including data and security operations centers.  Essential workers also include key third-party providers who deliver core services.

“The American people need access to financial sector services, and State and local governments must ensure the continuity of critical financial sector functions.  Everyone should follow guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as well as State and local officials regarding strategies to limit disease spread.  We are dedicated to working closely with the financial services sector to ensure the safety of the workforce and continuity of operations to support our Nation’s economy and all hardworking Americans.”

####
