---
title: “Get My Payment” Web App Launched for Americans to Submit Direct Deposit Information and Track Payments
date: 2020-04-15T09:21:34-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM978
url: /news/press-releases/sm978
---
WASHINGTON— Today, on what would have been[Tax Day](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm953), the U.S. Department of the Treasury and IRS launched the “Get My Payment” web application. The[FREE app](https://sa.www4.irs.gov/irfof-wmsp/)allows taxpayers who filed their tax return in 2018 or 2019 but did not provide their banking information on either return to submit direct deposit information.  Once they do, they will get their Economic Impact Payments deposited directly in their bank accounts, instead of waiting for a check to arrive in the mail.  “Get My Payment” also allows taxpayers to track the status of their payment.

“We are pleased that more than 80 million Americans have already received their Economic Impact Payments by direct deposit in record time,” said Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin. “The free ‘Get My Payment App’ will allow Americans who do not have their direct deposit information on file with the IRS to input it, track the status, and get their money fast.”

“Get My Payment” is an online app that will display on any desktop, phone or tablet. It does not need to be downloaded from an app store.

For taxpayers to track the status of their payment, they will need to enter basic information in the “Get My Payment” app:

- Social Security Number
- Date of birth
- Mailing address

Taxpayers who want to add their bank account information to speed receipt of their payment will also need to provide the following additional information:

- Their Adjusted Gross Income from their most recent tax return submitted, either 2019 or 2018
- The refund or amount owed from their latest filed tax return
- Bank account type, account and routing numbers

Taxpayers are encouraged to gather this information before they enter the portal to save time.

Americans who did not file a tax return in 2018 or 2019 can use[“Non-Filers: Enter Payment Info Here”](https://lnks.gd/l/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.eyJidWxsZXRpbl9saW5rX2lkIjoxMDAsInVyaSI6ImJwMjpjbGljayIsImJ1bGxldGluX2lkIjoiMjAyMDA0MTAuMjAwMDg1NTEiLCJ1cmwiOiJodHRwczovL3d3dy5pcnMuZ292L2Nvcm9uYXZpcnVzL25vbi1maWxlcnMtZW50ZXItcGF5bWVudC1pbmZvLWhlcmUifQ.ZUwE5f2i9zCTYAm5YoBpGvgkFKroY3BHjavM0hcHsa0/br/77271836997-l)to submit basic personal information to quickly and securely receive their Economic Impact Payments.

Americans who filed 2018 or 2019 tax returns with direct deposit information or receive Social Security do not need to take action. They will automatically receive payment in their bank accounts.

“Get My Payment” cannot update bank account information after an Economic Impact Payment has been scheduled for delivery. To help protect against potential fraud, the tool also does not allow people to change bank account information already on file with the IRS. The IRS **does not initiate** contact with taxpayers by email, text messages or social media channels to request personal or financial information. We urge taxpayers to be on the lookout for[scammers](https://www.irs.gov/newsroom/irs-issues-warning-about-coronavirus-related-scams-watch-out-for-schemes-tied-to-economic-impact-payments)and email phishing attempts about the COVID-19 and Economic Impact Payments.

 

[Visit the](https://sa.www4.irs.gov/irfof-wmsp/)[“Get My Payment” app.](https://sa.www4.irs.gov/irfof-wmsp/)

 

####
