---
title: United States Announces Nominee for Presidency of the Inter-American Development Bank Group
date: 2020-06-16T13:43:12-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SM1035
url: /news/press-releases/sm1035
---
**WASHINGTON** – Today the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced that the United States intends to nominate Mauricio J. Claver-Carone for the presidency of the Inter-American Development Bank Group (IDB).

“The IDB is at a critical juncture as the region faces growing challenges to economic growth and sustainable development, particularly in light of the global pandemic,” said Secretary Mnuchin.  “The nomination of Mr. Claver-Carone demonstrates President Trump’s strong commitment to U.S. leadership in important regional institutions, and to advancing prosperity and security in the Western Hemisphere.  We are confident that his leadership of the IDB will strengthen its ability to deliver development impact to the region.”

Mr. Claver-Carone currently serves as the Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Western Hemisphere Affairs at the National Security Council.  During his time at the White House, he spearheaded the whole-of-government Growth in the Americas (‘America Crece’) initiative to support economic development by catalyzing private sector investment in energy and infrastructure projects across Latin America and the Caribbean.

Mr. Claver-Carone also played an important role in developing the bipartisan Better Utilization of Investments Leading to Development Act of 2018, which created the U.S. International Development Finance Corporation, and has facilitated its robust engagement in Latin America.

In addition to roles in the private sector, Mr. Claver-Carone has previously served as U.S. Representative to the International Monetary Fund, as Senior Advisor to the Under Secretary for International Affairs at the U.S. Department of the Treasury, and as an attorney-advisor with the Treasury Department’s Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.

He earned his Bachelor of Arts degree from Rollins College, Juris Doctor from the Catholic University of America, and Master of Laws in International and Comparative Law from Georgetown University Law Center.

 

####
