---
title: "Letter from Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin to Members of the House and Senate"
date: 2020-10-11
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/sm1150
press_release_number: SM1150
---

To Members of the House and Senate:
When COVID-19 forced President Trump to shut down the economy, we worked very quickly with the Senate and the House to pass unprecedented legislation to help the economy.  We are very proud that party politics was put aside and that the Senate passed two important bills 96-0 and 100-0.  The House also passed them with overwhelming bipartisan support and President Trump signed them into law.  This was truly an example of us working together to help American workers and businesses that were impacted by the pandemic.  As a result of this legislation, the economy rebounded quickly and we did not experience an economic disaster similar to the Great Depression.  Certain parts of the economy are still in need of additional support, and our job is not done until we get everyone back to work.
Over the last few months, we have tried to work on a bipartisan basis to pass additional legislation.  Our focus has been on passing legislation to provide funds for testing, vaccines, distribution, and medical care.  We have also focused on getting money for schools so children can go back to school safely or have the resources to study at home.  Our focus has been on small businesses, hotels, restaurants, airlines, and other industries that have been shut down or scaled back for no reason other than COVID-19.  We have proposed extending enhanced unemployment benefits and sending direct payments to American citizens.  We have added money for rental and mortgage assistance, child care, broadband, and agriculture support.
We have offered many different proposals in an effort to pass bipartisan legislation.  We have both been available to speak to members of both parties as well as bipartisan groups.  The President is available to meet as well.
The House has passed two separate partisan bills instead of compromising with us on bipartisan legislation like we have done in the past.  We will continue to try to work with Speaker Pelosi and Senator Schumer.  It is not just about the top-line number but also about legislation that can be passed by both the House and the Senate and signed into law by President Trump to help the American people.
Now is the time for us to come together and immediately vote on a bill to allow us to spend the unused Paycheck Protection Program funds while we continue to work toward a comprehensive package.  The all-or-nothing approach is an unacceptable response to the American people.
Sincerely,
Steven Mnuchin                                                                    Mark Meadows
Secretary of the Treasury                                                      Chief of Staff
View Letter to the House and Senate
