---
title: Publication of the Final Environmental Impact Statement for the Proposed Construction of Bureau of Engraving and Printing Currency Production Facility
date: 2021-06-04T13:00:26-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy0212
---
WASHINGTON, D.C.– The U.S. Department of the Treasury, Bureau of Engraving and Printing (BEP) announces the public availability of the Final Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), prepared in accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), which analyzes potential environmental, cultural, and socioeconomic impacts associated with Treasury’s proposal to construct and operate a new Currency Production Facility (CPF) within the National Capital Region (NCR).

The proposed new facility would replace Treasury’s Washington, DC production facility, and would provide Treasury with a modern, scalable, sufficiently sized production facility within the NCR that meets Treasury’s needs. The proposed facility would result in more efficient and streamlined currency production, while allowing Treasury to maintain its presence within the NCR.

The BEP’s mission includes manufacturing US currency notes; research, development, testing, and evaluation of counterfeit deterrents; and development of production automation technologies. Previously, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) confirmed that the DC Facility, which has been in operation for more than 100 years, is neither able to support modern currency production nor able to support Treasury’s, and specifically the BEP’s, current and future missions of secure and efficient currency production, maximum worker safety, environmental responsibility, and effective use of public resources.

Resource areas analyzed in the Final EIS include: land use; visual resources; air quality; noise; topography and soils; water resources; biological resources; cultural resources; traffic and transportation; utilities; socioeconomics and environmental justice; hazardous and toxic materials and waste; and human health and safety. The EIS also analyzes potential cumulative environmental effects. Practical mitigation measures are identified in the Final EIS to reduce potential adverse effects.

Treasury conducted a public review and comment period for the Draft EIS between November 6 and December 21, 2020, including a Virtual Public Meeting on December 2, 2020. Based on the thorough analysis presented in the Final EIS, Treasury will prepare and execute its Record of Decision (ROD) announcing which Alternative is environmentally preferable, which Alternative it selects for implementation, and which mitigation measures it will implement to reduce potential adverse impacts. Finalization of the ROD will occur no sooner than 30 days after publication of the Final EIS.

[The EIS and construction project are overseen by the Army Corps of Engineers.](https://www.nab.usace.army.mil/home/bep-replacement-project/)

[Read more about the proposed facility construction and Final EIS at the Bureau of Engraving and Printing website](https://www.bep.gov/pressrelease060321.html).

###
