---
title: Treasury Designates Al-Qa’ida-Linked Financial Facilitators in Turkey and Syria
date: 2021-07-28
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy0293
---
WASHINGTON — Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) designated one Turkey-based al-Qa’ida financial facilitator for materially assisting al-Qa’ida. Additionally, OFAC designated one Syria-based terrorist fundraiser and recruiter for providing material support to Hay’et Tahrir Al-Sham (HTS). These designations expose the continued efforts by al-Qa’ida and HTS to use the global formal financial system and highlight the need for continued vigilance against terrorist fundraising and recruitment on the internet.

“Terrorist groups like al-Qa’ida and HTS continue to raise funds, recruit online, and exploit the international banking sector to support their ongoing terrorist activities,” said Office of Foreign Assets Control Director Andrea Gacki. “These designations underscore this Administration’s commitment to disrupting support networks of al-Qa’ida and other terrorist groups that seek to attack the United States and its allies.”

### Hasan al-Shaban

Al-Shaban’s banking information was provided by an al-Qa’ida fundraiser to prospective donors as a way for them to send money to support al-Qa’ida military efforts and the so-called mujahideen fighting in Syria. Members of al-Qa’ida utilized bank accounts associated with al-Shaban to coordinate the movement of money from associates across North Africa, Western Europe, and North America, and separately used al-Shaban to coordinate the transfer of funds to Turkey.

Al-Shaban is being designated pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, as amended, for having materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services to or in support of, al-Qa’ida.

### Farrukh Furkatovitch Fayzimatov

Fayzimatov utilizes social media to post propaganda, recruit new members, and solicit donations for HTS. Fayzimatov organized community fundraising campaigns to purchase equipment for the benefit of HTS, including motorbikes.

Fayzimatov is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for having materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services to or in support of HTS.

### SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of these individuals named above, and of any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by them, individually, or with other blocked persons, that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons must be blocked and reported to OFAC. Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC or otherwise exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within the United States (including transactions transiting the United States) that involve any property or interests in property of blocked or designated or otherwise blocked persons.

Furthermore, engaging in certain transactions with the individuals designated today entails risk of secondary sanctions pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended. Pursuant to this authority, OFAC can prohibit or impose strict conditions on the opening or maintaining in the United States of a correspondent account or a payable-through account by a foreign financial institution that either knowingly conducted or facilitated any significant transaction on behalf of a Specially Designated Global Terrorist.

[View identifying information related to today’s announcement.](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/recent-actions/20210728)

###
