---
title: Trip Guidance and Press Schedule for U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen
date: 2021-10-27
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy0438
---
*Friday, October 29 through Wednesday, November 3*

WASHINGTON —Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen will attend the G20 Joint Finance and Health Ministers’ Meeting on Friday, October 29 in Rome, Italy; G20 Heads of State and Government Summit on Saturday, October 30 and Sunday, October 31 in Rome, Italy; attend meetings to further global tax policy priorities in Dublin, Ireland on Sunday, October 31 and Monday, November 1; and represent the U.S. at the UN Climate Change Conference UK (COP26) on Tuesday, November 2 and Wednesday, November 3.

While overseas, Secretary Yellen will continue to reinforce the U.S. commitment to multilateralism and advance U.S. policy priorities on global tax policy as a part of a foreign policy for the middle class, climate change, an inclusive economic recovery, and global health. She will also hold meetings with counterparts, allies, and business leaders.

On Friday, October 29, Secretary Yellen will represent the U.S. at the G20 Joint Finance and Health Ministers’ Meeting and related official events. She will work with her counterparts to seize opportunities to foster a sustainable and inclusive global economic recovery and discuss ways to strengthen global pandemic preparedness.

On Saturday, October 30 and Sunday, October 31, Secretary Yellen will accompany President Biden to engagements and official events during the G20 Leader’s Summit. These events are closed press.

On Sunday, October 31, Secretary Yellen will travel to Dublin, Ireland where she will meet with Finance Minister Paschal Donohoe and members of the business community. While in Dublin, Secretary Yellen will highlight the historic OECD/G-20 Inclusive Framework agreement wherein virtually the entire global economy – 136 countries representing 94% of the world’s GDP – have agreed to a new set of international tax rules, including a global minimum tax that ends the damaging race to the bottom.

On November 1, Secretary Yellen will convene with Irish Finance Minister Paschal Donohoe for a bilateral meeting at Government Buildings. This meeting is closed press. Following that engagement, the two will host a press conference. Later in the day, Secretary Yellen and Minister Donohoe will attend an event hosted by the American Chamber of Commerce Ireland at the Shelbourne Hotel. They will join U.S. and Irish business leaders to discuss their perspectives on the agreement. Portions of this event are open press.

Secretary Yellen will also deliver remarks at Saint Patrick’s Hall in Dublin Castle at an event hosted by the Institute of International and European Affairs. Minister Donohoe will also attend and deliver remarks. This event is open press and will be livestreamed.

On November 2, Secretary Yellen will join President Biden and 12 U.S. Cabinet Secretaries at COP26 to galvanize efforts by the world’s major economies to reach the Paris Agreement target. At COP26, Secretary Yellen will also reiterate that tackling the climate crisis will require mobilizing and aligning trillions of dollars in capital through a global effort. She will also emphasize that public sector resources must go further and serve as effective catalysts to mobilize additional climate finance.

Additionally, Secretary Yellen will attend events, including ones hosted by His Royal Majesty Prince Charles of Wales, United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak, Mayor Michael Bloomberg, and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Throughout the events in Glasgow, the Secretary, she will underscore the value of multilateral, public-private partnered, and whole-of-society approach to addressing the climate crisis and the need for world leaders to make concrete commitments and raise ambition.

Further engagements and details will be announced in the coming days.

###
