---
title: Guidance and Press Schedule for U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen and Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo
date: 2021-10-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy0397
---
WASHINGTON — U.S. Secretary Janet L. Yellen will attend the Annual Meetings of the Boards of Governors of the IMF and the World Bank Group, as well as G7 and G20 Meetings of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors in Washington, D.C. from October 12-15, 2021. Secretary Yellen will continue to reinforce the U.S. commitment to multilateralism and advance U.S. policy priorities on global tax policy, climate change, global health, and an inclusive economic recovery.

Throughout, the Secretary will attend official meetings either in-person or virtually, including the meetings of the International Monetary and Financial Committee and the joint IMF-World Bank Development Committee. These meetings are closed press.

On October 12, Secretary Yellen will attend the Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action Virtual Ministerial Meeting. Secretary Yellen will highlight the robust U.S. climate change agenda and the work within the Coalition member countries to advance international collaboration on this topic. This event is closed press.

On October 12, Secretary Yellen will reconvene the heads and private sector leads of several of the multilateral development banks (MDBs) to follow-up on an initial July meeting in which she urged the MDBs to rapidly align their portfolios with the goals of the Paris Agreement and to redouble their efforts to mobilize significantly more private capital for climate. Participants included representatives from the African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Inter-American Development Bank Group, and the World Bank Group. This meeting is closed press.On October 13, Secretary Yellen will attend meetings of the G7 and G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors to discuss global tax policy and ending the race to the bottom in international corporate taxation, and policy priorities in areas including pandemic response and preparedness, securing an inclusive global economic recovery, and the transition to net zero.  These meetings are closed press.

Throughout the week, the Secretary and senior Treasury officials will hold bilateral meetings with counterparts and allies, including from other G20 economies and shareholders of the IMF and World Bank, as well as with multilateral partners. These include Bank of England Governor Andrew Bailey; Finance Minister Rogelio Ramirez de la O; Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance Chrystia Freeland of Canada; Treasurer Josh Frydenberg of Australia; Deputy Prime Minister Namki Hong of South Korea; Dutch Central Bank Governor Klaas Knot; European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde; Finance Minister Bruno Le Maire of France; Minister Sri Mulyani of Indonesia; Senior Minister and Coordinating Minister for Social Policies Tharman Shanmugaratnam of Singapore; Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman of India; and Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak of the United Kingdom. Secretary Yellen will also meet with Finance Minister Daniele Franco and Ambassador Mariangela Zappia of Italy; COP26 Finance Advisor & UN Special Envoy Mark Carney.On October 14, Secretary Yellen will host the eighth meeting of the U.S.-India Economic and Financial Partnership (EFP) with Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Jerome Powell, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman of India, and Governor Shaktikanta Das of the Reserve Bank of India. This meeting builds on the recent momentum in the U.S.-India relationship and will address a range of critical issues, including economic recovery from the global pandemic, climate finance, multilateral priorities, financial regulation, and AML/CFT.On October 12, Secretary Yellen’s pre-taped remarks will air at the Countdown Summit. This is closed press. On October 14, Secretary Yellen’s pre-taped remarks will air at the World Bank’s Making Climate Action Count: Turning Action into Reality event. This is open press.On October 13, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo will join Bretton Woods Committee Chair William C. Dudley to discuss the Administration’s international economic and multilateral priorities in a virtual fireside chat. This event is open press. He will also hold a bilateral meeting with the Minister of Commerce and Industry and Acting Minister of Finance Ali bin Ahmed Al Kuwari of Qatar. This meeting is closed press.The Secretary and Deputy Secretary are looking forward to continuing to work in close cooperation with allies and multilateral partners to address global challenges.
