---
title: United States Targets Family Members Profiting from Connection to Burmese Coup Leader
date: 2021-03-10T13:23:05-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy0051
---
**WASHINGTON** – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) sanctioned the two adult children of the commander-in-chief of the Burmese military forces, Min Aung Hlaing, who is the leading actor in the overthrow of Burma’s democratically elected government, as well as six companies of his two adult children.  Treasury took these actions in response to the Burmese military’s coup against the democratically elected civilian government of Burma and its brutal killing of peaceful protesters.  The United States stands in solidarity with the people of Burma, and we remain committed to promoting accountability for those responsible for the coup and ongoing violence.  The United States urges the immediate release of State Counselor Aung San Suu Kyi and President Win Myint, as well as all others unjustly detained since February 1, including members of civil society, journalists, and human rights activists.

“The indiscriminate violence by Burma’s security forces against peaceful protesters is unacceptable,” said Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control Andrea M. Gacki.  “The United States will continue to work with our international partners to press the Burmese military and police to cease all violence against peaceful protestors and to restore democracy and the rule of law in Burma.”

In today’s action, Treasury is designating Aung Pyae Sone and Khin Thiri Thet Mon pursuant to Executive Order 14014, “Blocking Property With Respect to the Situation in Burma,” for being foreign persons who are spouses or adult children of a person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to E.O. 14014.  Aung Pyae Sone and Khin Thiri Thet Mon are adult children of the commander-in-chief of the Burmese military forces, Min Aung Hlaing, whom OFAC designated on February 11, 2021, for being a leader or official of the military or security forces of Burma.  Aung Pyae Sone and Khin Thiri Thet Mon have a variety of business holdings, which have directly benefitted from their father’s position and malign influence.  Aung Pyae Sone won a 30-year permit in 2013 to lease land for Yangon Restaurant and Yangon Gallery in Rangoon without facing any competing bids.  From 2013 to 2018, Aung Pyae Sone paid less than 1 percent of the rental rate compared with other properties in the same township, with the Rangoon government acknowledging that the national government dictated the low rental rates.  Meanwhile, Khin Thiri Thet Mon owns Seventh Sense, a media production business with an exclusive contract with Nay Toe, an actor who features prominently in marketing for Mytel, the mobile telephone operator established by Min Aung Hlaing.

In addition to the individuals identified above, OFAC is also designating the following six Burmese entities pursuant to E.O. 14014 for being owned or controlled by Aung Pyae Sone or Khin Thiri Thet Mon:

- A & M Mahar Company Limited
- Sky One Construction Company Limited
- The Yangon Restaurant
- The Yangon Gallery
- Everfit Company Limited
- Seventh Sense Company Limited

Today’s action follows the Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security’s March 4, 2021 implementation of new export control restrictions on Burma and the addition of four Burmese entities to the Entity List:  the Burmese Ministry of Defence, the Burmese Ministry of Home Affairs, the Myanmar Economic Corporation, and the Myanmar Economic Holding Limited.  View the Department of Commerce’s press release on this action[here](https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2021/03/commerce-implements-new-export-controls-burma-and-makes-entity-list).

SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the individuals and entities named above, and of any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by them, individually or with other blocked persons, that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons, are blocked and must be reported to OFAC.  Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC or otherwise exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons.

[View more information on the persons designated today](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/recent-actions/20210310).

 

###
