---
title: 'READOUT: Treasury Deputy Secretary Wally Adeyemo Meeting with Thought Leaders on U.S. Economic and Financial Sanctions'
date: 2021-04-01T18:45:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy0098
---
Today, Deputy Secretary Wally Adeyemo kicked off a top to bottom review of U.S. economic and financial sanctions with a meeting of thought leaders, the first in a series of engagements to inform Treasury’s review. During the meeting, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo noted that sanctions remain a potent and valuable tool for policymakers and as programs are evaluated, it is critical to keep an eye toward ensuring they remain a strong, viable option in years to come. Participants confirmed the role of U.S. sanctions as a key instrument of U.S. national security and foreign policy, and the importance of a well-considered approach to their imposition, recognizing the technical expertise within Office of Foreign Assets Control and Treasury writ large. Finally, there was broad recognition from all participants of the value of coordination with allies and partners. Further consideration of the thoughtful and effective use of sanctions will be given throughout the sanctions review process.

Participants in the meeting included:

- Former Congressman Howard Berman, Covington & Burling LLP
- Mr. Brad Brooks-Rubin, The Sentry
- Dr. Chris Brummer, Georgetown University
- Ms. Julie Chon, Moore Capital Management
- Ambassador Paula Dobriansky, Harvard University
- Ms. Sue Eckert, CNAS
- Ambassador Daniel Fried, The Atlantic Council
- Ambassador Robert Kimmitt, WilmerHale LLP
- Mr. Adam Szubin, Johns Hopkins SAIS
- Mr. Ali Vaez, International Crisis Group
- Mr. Neal Wolin, Brunswick Group

###
