---
title: Treasury Sanctions Senior Officials and Family Members Connected to Burma’s Military
date: 2021-07-02T10:30:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy0260
---
WASHINGTON — Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) designated 22 individuals connected to Burma’s military regime.

Among the individuals sanctioned today are seven key members of Burma’s military, which continues to repress the pro-democracy movement in the country and use lethal force against the people of Burma, including children and members of ethnic minority groups.  The other 15 individuals are the spouses or adult children of previously designated senior Burmese military officials whose financial networks have contributed to military officials’ ill-gotten gains.  OFAC designated all these individuals pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 14014, “Blocking Property with Respect to the Situation in Burma.”  These sanctions are not directed at the people of Burma.

“The military’s suppression of democracy and campaign of brutal violence against the people of Burma are unacceptable,” said Andrea Gacki, Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control.  “Today’s action demonstrates that the United States will continue to impose increasing costs on Burma’s military and promote accountability for those responsible for the military coup and ongoing violence, including by targeting sources of revenue for the military and its leaders.”

These measures complement new restrictions announced today by the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) on four entities that have provided support to Burma’s military.  Effective July 2, BIS added the following four entities to the Department of Commerce Entity List set forth in Supp. No. 4 to Part 744 of the Export Administration Regulations, 15 CFR Parts 730-774 (EAR): King Royal Technologies Co., Ltd., a telecommunications company providing satellite communication services to Burma’s military, as well as Wanbao Mining and its two subsidiaries, Myanmar Wanbao Mining Copper, Ltd. and Myanmar Yang Tse Copper, Ltd., copper mining companies that provide support to Burma’s military through revenue-sharing arrangements with Myanma Economic Holdings Limited, which Treasury designated on March 25, 2021 pursuant to E.O. 14014.  As a consequence of their addition to the Entity List, a license requirement applies to all items subject to the EAR that are destined for the four entities, and BIS will review any license applications under a review policy of a presumption of denial.

As part of today’s action, the following seven individuals, who are members of Burma’s military regime, are designated pursuant to E.O. 14014 for being foreign persons who are or were leaders or officials of the Government of Burma on or after February 2, 2021:

- **Saw Daniel**,**Banyar Aung Moe**, and**Aye Nu Sein**are members of the State Administrative Council (SAC), the body created by the military on February 2, 2021 to support its unlawful overthrow of the democratically elected civilian government, and which Treasury designated on May 17, 2021 pursuant to E.O. 14014;

- **Chit Naing**is the Minister for Information;

- **Aung Naing Oo**is the Minister for Investment and Foreign Economic Relations;

- **Myint Kyaing**is the Minister for Labor, Immigration, and Population; and

- **Thet Thet Khine**is the Minister of Social Welfare, Relief, and Resettlement.

In addition to the individuals identified above, the following 15 individuals are designated pursuant to E.O. 14014 for being a spouse or adult child of a person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to E.O. 14014.

- **Kyu Kyu Hla**is the spouse of SAC Chairman Senior General Min Aung Hlaing, whom Treasury designated on February 11, 2021;

- **Than Than Nwe**is the spouse of SAC Vice Chairman Vice Senior General Soe Win,whom Treasury designated on February 11, 2021;

- **Thet Thet Aung**is the spouse of SAC member General Mya Tun Oo, whom Treasury designated on February 11, 2021;

- **Than Than Aye**is the spouse of SAC member Admiral Tin Aung San, whom Treasury designated on February 11, 2021;

- **Aung Mar Myint**is the spouse of SAC member General Maung Maung Kyaw, whom Treasury designated on February 22, 2021;

- **Khaing Pa Pa Chit**is the spouse of SAC member Lieutenant General Moe Myint Tun, whom Treasury designated on February 22, 2021;

- **Moe Htet Htet Tun**is the adult child of Lieutenant General Moe Myint Tun;

- **Khaing Moe Myint**is the adult child of Lieutenant General Moe Myint Tun;

- **Yadanar Moe Myint**is the adult child of Lieutenant General Moe Myint Tun;

- **Daw Nilar**is the spouse of SAC member Lieutenant General Ye Win Oo, whom Treasury designated on February 11, 2021;

- **Theit Thinzar Ye**is the adult child of Lieutenant General Ye Win Oo;

- **Ohn Mar Myint**is the spouse of SAC member Lieutenant General Aung Lin Dwe, whom Treasury designated on February 11, 2021;

- **Shwe Ye Phu Aung**is the adult child of Lieutenant General Aung Lin Dwe;

- **Hlaing Bwar Aung**is the adult child of Lieutenant General Aung Lin Dwe; and

- **Phyo Arkar Aung**is the adult child of Lieutenant General Aung Lin Dwe.

As a result of today’s OFAC action, all property and interests in property of the persons named above that are in the United States, or in the possession or control of U.S. persons, are blocked and must be reported to OFAC.  In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked.

Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or otherwise exempt, all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons are prohibited.  The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any blocked person or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

[View more information on the persons designated today.](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/recent-actions/20210702)

###
