---
title:  Treasury Designates Violent Colombian Drug Lord Action Additionally Targets Four Companies, Ten Associates of North Valle Cartel
date: 2021-01-09T00:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/js3012
---
*(Archived Content)*

JS-3012

The U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today named Colombian Wilber Varela, a.k.a. "Jabon," as a principal Specially Designated Narcotics Trafficker (SDNT) of the North Valle drug cartel. The Treasury also identified four companies and ten other North Valle associates, including rising North Valle cartel leaders Eduardo Restrepo Victoria, a.k.a. "El Socio" and Ramon Quintero Sanclemente. Today's action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 12978, which applies economic sanctions against Colombian drug cartels.

"An assassin turned drug lord, Varela's trafficking and lethal exploits are fueled through the North Valle cartel's financial flows," said Robert Werner, OFAC Director. "This designation directly targets a financial nucleus of the notorious North Valle cartel."

In May 2004, the District Court for the District of Colombia charged the leaders of the North Valle cartel, including Wilber Varela, with Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) violations. The District Court for the Eastern District of New York separately indicted Varela on narcotics trafficking charges. Considered extremely dangerous, Varela is a former assassin who rose to become a North Valle cartel leader by killing competing rival cartel leaders. The United States is offering up to $5 million for information leading to his arrest.

Ramon Quintero Sanclemente and Eduardo Restrepo Victoria are rising North Valle traffickers associated with Varela. In 1999, the Southern District of Florida indicted Ramon Quintero Sanclemente, a.k.a. Lucas, on narcotics trafficking and money trafficking charges. Restrepo Victoria is wanted by Colombian authorities on conspiracy and gunrunning charges.

Also named today are four companies owned and controlled by Varela associates. They include a plastics company, an agricultural company and a professional services firm, all based in Colombia. A Guadalajara, Mexico travel agency is also named.

Today's announcement is a result of the ongoing efforts between OFAC and U.S. law enforcement, particularly the Drug Enforcement Administration and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Today's action freezes any assets the designees may have located in the United States and prohibits all financial and commercial transactions between the designees and any U.S. person.

1,230 companies and individuals in Aruba, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama, Peru, Spain, Vanuatu, Venezuela, the Bahamas, the British Virgin Islands, and the Cayman Islands, have been designated pursuant to E.O. 12978. The 464 SDNT businesses include agricultural, aviation, consulting, construction, distribution, financial, investment, manufacturing, mining, offshore, pharmaceutical, real estate, service and travel firms. The SDNT list includes 19 drug kingpins from the Cali, North Valle, and North Coast drug cartels in Colombia, including newly named North Valle cartel leader Wilber Varela.

For a complete list of individuals and entities designated today, please visit:[**http://www.treasury.gov/offices/enforcement/ofac/actions/20051109.shtml**](https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20051109.aspx)**.  REPORTS**

- [Varela Drug Trafficking Organization North Valle Drug Cartel November 2005](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/archive-documents/js3012_chart.pdf)
