---
title: Trip Guidance and Press Schedule for U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen 
date: 2022-05-13
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy0780
---
*Saturday, May 14 through Friday, May 20 *

 

WASHINGTON – U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen will represent the United States at the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting in Bonn, Germany on May 19 and 20. Prior to the G7 sessions, Secretary Yellen will travel to Warsaw, Poland on May 14 and to Brussels, Belgium on May 16.

While overseas, Secretary Yellen will reinforce the U.S. commitment to multilateralism and advance U.S. policy priorities on an inclusive economic recovery. Secretary Yellen and U.S. allies will also continue their united efforts to support Ukraine and to increase economic pressure on Russia to end its brutal and illegal war. She will also work with her counterparts to advance a minimum global corporate tax as a part of a foreign policy for the middle class, address energy security and the threat of global food insecurity resulting from Russia’s unprovoked war, and strengthen the global health architecture.

On May 16, in Warsaw, Secretary Yellen will meet with Mateusz Morawiecki, the Prime Minister of Poland; Finance Minister Magdalena Rzeczkowska of Poland; National Bank of Poland Governor Adam Glapiński; and Mark Brzezinski, the U.S. Ambassador to Poland. Throughout, Secretary Yellen will discuss the war’s impact on Poland’s economy, particularly on inflation, fiscal policy, and supply chains. Secretary Yellen will also express her gratitude for the generosity Poland has shown in welcoming refugees, address the rising threat of food insecurity, and discuss the agreement on new international tax rules, including a global minimum tax that will raise crucial revenues that will benefit the citizens of both countries. Bilateral meetings with the Prime Minister and Finance Minister will have photo sprays for pre-approved media. The meeting between Secretary Yellen and National Bank of Poland Governor Glapiński is closed press.

In the morning, Secretary Yellen will visit the Wilcza Hostel and World Central Kitchen (WCK) facility for Ukrainian refugees, where she will spotlight the work of WCK to provide meals to Ukrainian refugees, and highlight Treasury’s ongoing efforts to address the food security challenges facing the region and world. This event is open to pre-approved media.

In the afternoon, Secretary Yellen will visit the POLIN Museum of the History of Polish Jews, on the site of the former Warsaw Ghetto.  The Museum showcases the important history of Jews in Poland over the past thousand years and stands directly across from the Monument to the Ghetto Heroes, which commemorates the 1943 Warsaw Ghetto Uprising. Secretary Yellen will give brief remarks and lay a wreath at the Monument to the Ghetto Heroes. This event is open to pre-approved media. In the evening, Secretary Yellen will travel to Brussels, Belgium.

On May 17, in Brussels, Secretary Yellen will meet with Ursula von der Leyen, President of the European Commission and Mark Gitenstein, the U.S. Ambassador to the European Union.  These meetings will focus on the impact of Russia’s war against Ukraine, including European energy security and Russian energy imports, Ukraine’s economic assistance needs, and on the implementation of the global tax agreement. More details will be forthcoming.

At 11:15 A.M. local time, Secretary Yellen will deliver the Tommaso Padoa Schioppa Lecture at the Brussels Economic Forum 2022. She will address the way forward for the global economy in the wake of Russia’s brutal war against Ukraine, and discuss the unmet challenges that would benefit from multilateral cooperation in the years ahead. Other speakers include Valdis Dombrovskis, Executive Vice President of the European Commission; Paolo Gentiloni, Commissioner for the Economy of the European Commission; and Gita Gopinath, the First Deputy Managing Director at the International Monetary Fund. This event is open press and will be livestreamed. More information is available at[European Commission - Brussels Economic Forum 2022 (europa.eu)](https://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/bef2022/index.html?utm_source=twitter&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=BEF2022).

On May 18, Secretary Yellen will travel to Bonn, Germany. In the afternoon, Secretary Yellen will host a press conference in advance of the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting. This event is open to pre-approved media; the[press conference will also be livestreamed here](https://www.youtube.com/c/USTreasGov). More information will be available in a forthcoming media advisory.

On May 19 and 20, Secretary Yellen will represent the U.S. at the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting and related official events. Throughout, Secretary Yellen and U.S. allies will work to advance the global economic recovery and continue their united efforts to increase economic pressure on Russia to end its brutal and illegal war against Ukraine. The meetings will also focus on implementation of the landmark global tax agreement to level the playing field, threats to energy security and global food security resulting from Russia’s war, and addressing the climate crisis.  Secretary Yellen will also meet bilaterally with several counterparts. These meetings are closed press.

Further relevant engagements and details will be announced in the coming days.
