---
title: Treasury and The White House Announce New ChildTaxCredit.gov to Help Families Access the Full Child Tax Credit
date: 2022-01-24T14:00:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy0567
---
*The revamped ChildTaxCredit.gov has new features to meet taxpayers where they are and help them file their tax returns as filing season begins. *

WASHINGTON – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the White House announced the re-launch of a revamped website –[ChildTaxCredit.gov](http://www.childtaxcredit.gov)– with several new features to help taxpayers file their taxes and access the remainder of the expanded Child Tax Credit (CTC) or the full amount of the CTC as tax filing season begins.

In March 2021, President Biden signed the American Rescue Plan (ARP), which expanded the Child Tax Credit and, for the first time, gave low-income families access to the full amount of the credit. The ARP also allowed the IRS to distribute half of the tax credit to families through monthly payments. Tens of millions of families received CTC monthly payments from July through December of 2021. To receive the other half of their payments, taxpayers must file a tax return.

Some taxpayers who have qualifying children didn’t receive advance payments in 2021 – because they welcomed a new baby in 2021, haven’t filed taxes before, or for other reasons. These taxpayers will get their full credit by filing their tax returns.

“As tax filing season begins, Treasury’s priority is ensuring that eligible families are able to receive the full Child Tax Credit,” said Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo. “This relief has helped families pay for essentials when they needed it most and by getting the second half, or the full amount, of the credit millions of children can continue to benefit.”

To help Americans navigate tax filing season, the website’s new features include a tool that directs taxpayers to the best free filing options based on answers to a handful of simple questions. These options include both virtual and in-person support in multiple languages. It also features clearly written, reliable information about the CTC, eligibility, and how to get the credit.

###
