---
title: Press Schedule for U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen and Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo at the 2022 IMF-World Bank Spring Meetings, G7 and G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meetings
date: 2022-04-18T12:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy0718
---
WASHINGTON —Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen will participate in the 2022 IMF-World Bank Spring Meetings throughout the week of April 18 in Washington, D.C. The Secretary will also represent the U.S. at the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting and in select sessions at the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting, both on April 20 in Washington, D.C.

Throughout, Secretary Yellen will reinforce the U.S. commitment to multilateralism and advance U.S. policy priorities on an inclusive economic recovery. She will work with her counterparts to advance global tax policy as a part of a foreign policy for the middle class, combat the climate crisis, strengthen the global health architecture, and address the growing global food security crisis resulting from Russia’s brutal and illegal war against Ukraine. Secretary Yellen and her allies will also continue their united efforts to increase economic pressure on Russia while mitigating spillover effects.

Secretary Yellen will hold a bilateral meeting with the Prime Minister of Ukraine Denys Shmyhal. The Secretary will reiterate the Biden Administration’s firm support for the people of Ukraine as they defend their lives and their country. The Secretary will also underscore our shared resolve to hold Russia accountable and provide Ukraine necessary aid. This meeting will be closed press; there will be a still photo spray with no remarks at the beginning.

On April 19, Secretary Yellen will represent the U.S. at the Coalition of Finance Ministerial for Climate Action. This event is closed press.

At 10:00 am ET, Secretary Yellen will convene the heads of the IMF, World Bank, and International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), and Ministers representing the G7 and G20, as well as lead technical experts at the International Financial Institutions (IFIs) to discuss the urgent response to the ongoing global food security crisis exacerbated by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The meeting will call on international financial institutions to accelerate and deepen their response to assist affected countries. Participants in the opening session include Kristalina Georgieva, Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF); David Malpass, President of the World Bank; Gilbert Houngbo, President of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD); ​ and lead technical experts at the African Development Bank, Asian Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Inter-American Development Bank, IFAD, World Bank, and IMF. Pre-recorded remarks by Finance Minister and G7 Finance Chair Christian Lindner of Germany will also be streamed; G20 Finance Chair Sri Mulyani Indrawati will attend. The opening panel will be livestreamed[here](https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts).

Secretary Yellen will host a press conference on April 21 at 11:00 a.m. ET in the Cash Room at the Treasury Department. This event is open to pre-approved media; the press conference will also be livestreamed[here](https://youtube.com/c/USTreasGov). More information, including on how members of the media can attend, will be available in a forthcoming media advisory.

Earlier that day, Secretary Yellen will participate in the International Monetary and Financial Committee Virtual Plenary Meeting where she will address ​​the global economic outlook, particularly the impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, as well as IMF priorities. This event is closed press. In the evening, Secretary Yellen will ​​meet with her 24 World Bank Development Committee counterparts to discuss the World Bank’s support to countries affected by Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV). This event is closed press.

On April 21, Secretary Yellen will attend the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Ministerial Meeting to discuss the group’s strategic priorities for the year, including increasing beneficial ownership transparency, asset recovery, and fighting corruption. Combatting corruption has been a key focus of the Biden-Harris Administration, and Treasury is supporting effective implementation of international financial transparency and anti-corruption standards to promote global safety and security. Supporting the entire FATF Global Network is an important priority for the United States, as is ensuring a robust and fair mutual evaluation process. This event is closed press.

Throughout the week, Secretary Yellen will meet bilaterally with several other counterparts including Finance Minister Mohammad Al-Jadaan of Saudi Arabia; Bank of England Governor Andrew Bailey; European Commission Executive Vice President Valdis Dombrovskis; Finance Minister Daniele Franco of Italy; Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana of South Africa; ​​European Commissioner of the Economy Paolo Gentiloni; Finance Minister Sri Mulyani Indrawati of Indonesia; National Bank Governor Thomas Jordan or Switzerland; Ambassador of the European Union to the United States Stavros Lambrinidis; Finance Minister Christian Lindner of Germany; Finance Minister Mario Marcel of Chile; Finance Minister Ueli Maurer of Switzerland; Ministry of Economy and Finance Hong Nam-ki of Korea; Secretary of Finance and Public Credit Rogelio Ramirez de la O of Mexico; Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak of the UK; and Minister Shunichi Suzuki of Japan. These meetings are closed press.

Deputy Secretary Wally Adeyemo will also participate in several official and unofficial meetings as part of the Spring Meetings, where he will reinforce the U.S. commitment to multilateralism and advance U.S. policy priorities.

On April 21, the Deputy Secretary will meet with the Finance Minister of Ukraine Sergii Marchenko where he will reiterate the U.S.’s unwavering support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and for mobilizing resources for rebuilding and humanitarian efforts. This roundtable, which will also be attended by prominent business leaders, is closed press. There will be a still photo spray with no remarks at the beginning; a media advisory will be sent with more information.

On April 18 at 2:00 p.m. ET, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will deliver remarks at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. The remarks will be followed by a moderated Q&A with Adam Posen, PIIE President. This event is open press and will be livestreamed; more information is available[here](https://www.piie.com/events/macro-week-2022).

On April 20, the Deputy Secretary will moderate a roundtable discussion on identifying and countering corruption. This event is closed press.

On April 22 at 11:00 a.m. ET, the Deputy Secretary will participate in a moderated conversation on the global economic outlook with Mark Sobel, U.S. Chairman of the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum. This event will be livestreamed[here](https://www.omfif.org/events/fireside-chat-with-wally-adeyamo/).

Later that day, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will participate in a meeting on next steps for support for Afghanistan and its economic recovery at the Ministerial Meeting of G7 Partners and Major ARTF Donors on Afghanistan. This meeting is closed press.

Throughout the week, the Deputy Secretary will meet bilaterally with counterparts, including; Managing Director Ravi Menon of Monetary Authority of Singapore; Central Bank Governor Madis Müller of Estonia; Central Bank Governor Roberto Campos Neto of Brazil;  Finance Minister Keit Pentus-Rosimannus of Estonia; Finance Minister Jānis Reirs of Latvia; Director General of the Treasury Alessandro Rivera of Italy; Finance Minister Gintare Skaiste of Lithuania; Central Bank Governor Gediminas Simkus of Lithuania; Finance Minister Lawrence Wong of Singapore; These meetings are closed press.

The following week, on April 26, Secretary Yellen will convene a high-level roundtable as part of launch week of the Biden-Harris Administration’s infrastructure initiative announced at the G7 summit at Carbis Bay.  The initiative is a U.S. government-wide effort to invest in high-quality infrastructure, principally in the areas of climate, health, digital, and gender.  To mark its launch, Secretary Yellen will host a discussion with the multilateral development banks (MDBs) and her counterparts from the G7 and Australia. The roundtable will discuss how the MDBs can leverage their financing, technical assistance and policy advice to expand sustainable infrastructure as well as mobilize private sector finance for infrastructure.  The event is closed press.

Both Secretary Yellen and Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will participate in other closed press official and unofficial events. Any further relevant public engagements and details will be announced in the coming days.

 

####
