---
title: Schedule for Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen and Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo at the 2022 Annual Meetings of the IMF and World Bank
date: 2022-10-11T06:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1004
---
WASHINGTON —Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen and Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo will represent the United States in the 2022 Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank Group (WBG) and participate in official events on the margins of the Annual Meetings from Tuesday, October 11, through Friday, October 14 in Washington, DC. Secretary Yellen will represent the United States at the G7 and G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors meetings.

Throughout the week, Secretary Yellen will continue to rally the global coalition of allies and partners holding Russia accountable for its illegal war against Ukraine and supporting the Ukrainian people and government. The Secretary will redouble efforts to advance a price cap on Russian oil, continue to lead the broad alliance leveling sanctions on Russia, and encourage our partners to accelerate and increase the scale of economic assistance to Ukraine. Secretary Yellen will also help lead the global response to the macroeconomic impacts of global shocks—including COVID-19 and Russia’s war of aggression—which have been particularly disruptive for emerging market and low-income countries.

Secretary Yellen will discuss the resilience of the American economy in the face of these headwinds, as well as actions the United States and our partners have taken to mitigate these challenges, including through advancing food security, addressing debt sustainability issues in emerging markets, and evolving the multilateral development banks (MDBs) to be better equipped to respond to the increasing frequency, scope, and complexity of global challenges. Additionally, the Secretary will underscore the importance of building on America’s largest-ever investment in fighting climate change—thanks to the Inflation Reduction Act and Bipartisan Infrastructure Law—to spur global action. Secretary Yellen will discuss how to build on this progress to meet global emissions goals including through more robust individual country actions, Just Energy Transition Partnerships (JETPs), and urging the MDBs to strengthen their climate ambition.

On Tuesday, October 11, Secretary Yellen will attend the G20 Joint Finance-Agriculture Ministerial Meeting on Food Insecurity. Later in the day, the Secretary will host bilateral meetings with Finance Minister of Indonesia Sri Mulyani Indrawati, Finance Minister of Ukraine Sergii Marchenko, and Finance Minister of India Nirmala Sitharaman. The bilateral meetings with Ukrainian and Indian counterparts will have a press spray with remarks at the top for pre-registered media.

In the evening, Secretary Yellen and Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will host a group of Finance Ministers from Africa at the Treasury Department for a dinner. This dinner will have a press spray with remarks at the top for pre-registered media.

On Wednesday, October 12, Secretary Yellen will represent the United States at the Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action ministerial.

At 10:00 AM, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will participate in a fireside chat at the Columbia Global Energy Summit hosted by the Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia University SIPA in New York City. This event will be open to[pre-registered media](https://www.energypolicy.columbia.edu/columbia-global-energy-summit-2022)and livestreamed.

At 1:45 PM, Secretary Yellen will participate in the Second Ministerial Roundtable Discussion for Support to Ukraine. This event’s opening session, including Secretary Yellen’s remarks, will be[livestreamed here](https://live.worldbank.org/events/annual-meetings-2022-ministerial-roundtable-ukraine). Following that, at 3:45 PM, Secretary Yellen will deliver remarks and participate in a fireside chat at the Bretton Woods Committee’s International Council. This event will be open to[pre-registered media](https://www.brettonwoods.org/event/international-council-2022)and livestreamed.

Later Wednesday, Secretary Yellen will participate in the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Working Dinner.

On Thursday, October 13, Secretary Yellen will participate in a breakfast with G20 finance ministers hosted by Finance Minister of India Nirmala Sitharaman. Then, Secretary Yellen will participate in the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting.

Later, Secretary Yellen will hold a bilateral meeting with European Commission Executive Vice-President and Trade Commissioner Valdis Dombrovskis and European Commissioner for Economy Paolo Gentiloni at the IMF. This meeting will have a press spray with remarks at the top for pre-registered media. Finally on Thursday, Secretary Yellen will participate in the International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC) Restricted Early Warning Exercise. This meeting will be closed press.

On Friday, October 14, Secretary Yellen will participate in the IMFC Restricted Breakfast in the morning. At 8:00AM, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will host a convening on sanctions with members of the global sanctions coalition against Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine. During the meeting, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will share analysis on how we have successfully degraded Russia’s military supply chains and consult with counterparts on how to redouble our efforts. This meeting will have a press spray with remarks at the top for pre-registered media.

Later, Secretary Yellen will join a meeting of the Eurogroup, finance ministers of the euro zone member states. This meeting will have a photo spray at the top for pre-registered media. At 1:30 PM, Secretary Yellen will hold a press conference at the IMF. This event will be open to pre-registered media and will be livestreamed. This meeting will have a press spray with remarks at the top for pre-registered media. Following that, Secretary Yellen will participate in the Development Committee Meeting.

Secretary Yellen and Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will also participate in other closed press events and bilateral meetings on the margins of the Annual Meetings.

###
