---
title: "Statement by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen on President Biden’s Intention to Nominate Daniel Werfel to Serve as IRS Commissioner"
date: 2022-11-10
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1095
press_release_number: JY1095
---

WASHINGTON, D.C. – Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen issued the following statement on President Biden’s intention to nominate Daniel Werfel to serve as the next IRS Commissioner.
“I strongly support President Biden’s intent to nominate Daniel Werfel to serve as the next Commissioner of the IRS. Danny’s prior service under both Democratic and Republican administrations, his deep management experience, and his work directing significant transformation efforts, make him uniquely qualified to lead the agency at this critical juncture.
“After decades of underfunding, the IRS now has the resources it needs to improve services for taxpayers and modernize outdated technology and infrastructure. Danny’s deep commitment to fairness and making sure government works for all will also be invaluable as we improve the taxpayer experience and eliminate a two-tiered tax system. In addition, Danny’s leadership will be critical to effectively and efficiently implement the clean energy tax incentives that will increase production in the United States and lead to significant job creation. I urge the Senate to act swiftly to confirm Danny and look forward to working with him in the years ahead.”
Daniel Werfel has served in a variety of leadership roles in the federal government and private sector. He currently is a Managing Director and Partner at Boston Consulting Group, where  he runs the firm’s global public sector practice, focusing on all aspects of organizational change for a variety of firms around the world. In 2009, he was nominated by President Obama to be the Controller of the Office of Management and Budget, a post he served in for four years before becoming Acting Commissioner of the IRS in 2013. He began his career at OMB in 1997 as a policy analyst in the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs. He holds a bachelor’s degree from Cornell University, a JD from the University of North Carolina, and a master’s degree in public policy from Duke University.
###
