---
title: Treasury Targets Major Arms Broker for Burma’s Military Regime
date: 2022-11-08
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1086
---
WASHINGTON – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) designated pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 14014 one individual and one entity that facilitate weapons purchases for Burma’s military regime. This action, which is in conjunction with newly issued European Union sanctions, marks the second anniversary of the last general election in Burma on November 8, 2020, which was brutally overturned by a military coup on February 1, 2021.

Burma’s military regime has continued to oppress and deny the will of the people to chart an inclusive, democratic future for their country. The sanctions announced today do not target the people of Burma but rather target those who profit from the oppressive actions of the regime by operating in the defense sectors of Burma’s economy and by enabling Burma’s military connections to foreign militaries.

“Kyaw Min Oo profits from the violence and suffering the military has inflicted on the people of Burma since the military coup,” said Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Brian E. Nelson. “Treasury reaffirms the United States’ commitment to continue increasing pressure on the regime and its supporters until they change course and allow for a return to democracy.”

### ARMS DEALER

**Kyaw Min Oo** is a Burmese national and businessman with close ties to the Burmese military. Since before the February 2021 coup, Kyaw Min Oo has facilitated arms deals and weapons purchases on behalf of Burma’s military, while also acting as the middleman to arrange visits to Burma by high-ranking foreign military officers. Additionally, Kyaw Min Oo has used his company,** Sky Aviator Company Limited**, to facilitate upgrades and maintenance for Burmese military aircraft.

Kyaw Min Oo is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14014 for operating in the defense sector of the Burmese economy.

Sky Aviator Company Limited is a company founded by Kyaw Min Oo and has facilitated arms deals on behalf of the Burmese military, to include the import of aircraft parts.  Sky Aviator Company Limited was designated by the United Kingdom on June 16, 2022.

Sky Aviator Company Limited is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14014 for operating in the defense sector of the Burmese economy.

### SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, pursuant to E.O. 14014, all property and interests in property of the persons named above that are in the United States, or in the possession or control of U.S. persons, are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked.

Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or otherwise exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons. The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any blocked person or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List), but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to OFAC’s[Frequently Asked Question 897](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/faqs/897). For detailed information on the process to submit a request for removal from an OFAC sanctions list, please refer to[OFAC’s website](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[For identifying information on the individuals sanctioned today, click here.](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/recent-actions/20221108)
