---
title: U.S. Treasury Imposes Sanctions on Russian Federation President Vladimir Putin and Minister of Foreign Affairs Sergei Lavrov
date: 2022-02-25T16:04:06-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy0610
---
*United States, in Partnership with Allies and Partners, Sanctions the Architects of Russia’s War Against Ukraine*

*State Department Also Sanctions Minister of Defense Sergei Shoigu and Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces Valery Gerasimov*

 

WASHINGTON – Today, the United States, in coordination with allies and partners, continued to forcefully respond to Russia’s unjustified, unprovoked, and premeditated invasion of Ukraine by imposing sanctions on President of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin and the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sergei Lavrov, as well as other members of Russia’s Security Council. This builds on other sweeping actions that the United States and partners took earlier this week targeting the core infrastructure of the Russian financial system, including sanctions against Russia’s largest financial institutions, restricting the ability of the Government of the Russian Federation to raise capital, and cutting it off from access to critical technologies. Cumulatively, these actions impose unprecedented diplomatic and economic costs on Russia and further isolate it from the global financial system and international community.

President Putin and Minister Lavrov are directly responsible for Russia’s unprovoked and unlawful further invasion of Ukraine, a democratic sovereign state. It is exceedingly rare for Treasury to designate a head of state; President Putin joins a very small group that includes despots such as Kim Jong Un, Alyaksandr Lukashenka, and Bashar al-Assad. In addition, today the U.S. Department of State designated two additional Government of Russia (GoR) officials and members of Russia’s Security Council directly responsible for the further invasion of Ukraine: Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation, Sergei Shoigu, and Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces, First Deputy Minister of Defense, and General of the Army Valery Gerasimov. Treasury has previously designated eleven members of the Russian Security Council and will continue to impose costs on the ruling elite as Russia prosecutes this brutal war of choice.

“Treasury is continuing to inflict costs on the Russian Federation and President Putin for their brutal and unprovoked assault on the people of Ukraine. As President Biden said yesterday, Putin rejected every good faith effort the United States and our allies and partners made to address our mutual security concerns through dialogue to avoid needless conflict and avert human suffering,” said Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen. “We are united with our international allies and partners to ensure Russia pays a severe economic and diplomatic price for its further invasion of Ukraine. If necessary, we are prepared to impose further costs on Russia for its appalling behavior on the world stage.”

The United States continues to work closely with partners and allies to impose severe consequences for Russia’s unprovoked war against Ukraine. Sustained financial diplomacy over several months on a near daily basis with partners and allies at every level has strengthened the unity of purpose, resolve, and technical coordination on impactful measures that will be felt deeply in Russia. Today’s actions demonstrate that sanctions will continue to strike directly at those most responsible for Russia’s hostile actions against its neighbors, including the most powerful and wealthy Russian elites.

Today’s actions were taken pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 14024, which authorizes sanctions against Russia for its harmful foreign activities, including violating well-established principles of international law such as respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of other states.

 

### TARGETING THE HEAD OF STATE OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND HIS CHIEF PROPAGANDIST

The President of the Russian Federation has perpetrated horrific aggression against Ukraine. Russia’s most recent actions in Ukraine are yet another unprovoked and illegal assault on this sovereign nation that has already suffered the illegal invasion and subsequent occupation of the Crimean Peninsula and years of slowly degrading the stability of Ukraine’s Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

**Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin** (Putin) is the President of the Russian Federation and the head of Russia’s Security Council. As President, Putin is the Commander-in-Chief of the Russian Armed Forces currently undertaking an unjustified incursion into a sovereign European state. No one individual is more responsible for Russia’s war against Ukraine, destabilization of Russia’s neighbors, the suffering of the Ukrainian people, and years of Russian malign activities globally. **Sergei Victorovich Lavrov** (Lavrov) is the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation and a permanent member of Russia’s Security Council. As Foreign Minister, Lavrov has advanced the false narrative that Ukraine is the aggressor as he has aggressively sought to justify Russia’s actions globally. Additionally, as the top diplomat representing Russia on the world stage, Lavrov has helped facilitate Russia’s aggressive actions against sovereign states and enabled Russia to degrade democracy globally.

OFAC designated Putin and Lavrov pursuant to E.O. 14024 for being or having been a leader, official, senior executive officer, or members of the board of directors of the GoR.

 

### RUSSIAN SECURITY COUNCIL MEMBERS AND ENABLERS OF THE RUSSIAN PRESIDENT

The United States, and our allies and partners, will continue to target Russian elites for their role in bankrolling Russia’s further aggression against Ukraine, empowering Putin, or participating in Russia’s kleptocracy. Those who hold powerful positions within the GoR may be targeted if Russia’s further aggression against Ukraine does not stop.

Today’s action demonstrates the United States’ commitment to a free and democratic Ukraine, which has been unwavering since Russia first attacked the country in 2014. This action builds off of previous OFAC designations of Russian Security Council members. In previous actions, OFAC designated the following 11 members of the Russian Security Council pursuant to Russia- and Ukraine-related authorities and will designate more in the future if Russia’s unprovoked campaign against Ukraine does not immediately conclude.

**Valentina Matviyenko**, Chairwoman of the Council of Federation **Sergei Naryshkin**, Director of the Foreign Intelligence Service **Vyacheslav Volodin**, State Duma Speaker **Sergei Ivanov**, Special Presidential Representative for Environmental Protection, Ecology, and Transport **Nikolai Patrushev**, Secretary of the Russian Federation Security Council **Vladimir Kolokoltsev**, Interior Minister **Alexander Bortnikov**, Director of the Federal Security Service **Igor Krasnov**, Prosecutor General **Igor Shchegolev**, Presidential Plenipotentiary Envoy to the Central Federal District **Vladimir Ustinov**, Presidential Plenipotentiary Envoy to the Southern Federal District **Viktor Zolotov**, Director of the Federal Service of National Guard Troops and Commander of the National Guard Troops

 

### SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the individuals above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. All transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons are prohibited unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or otherwise exempt. These prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any blocked person and the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

 

[For identifying information on the individuals sanctioned today, click here.](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/recent-actions/20220225_33)

   

###
