---
title: Treasury Targets Workers’ Party of Korea Officials Supporting DPRK Weapons Programs
date: 2022-12-01
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1134
---
*Action Taken in Close Coordination with the Republic of Korea and Japan*

WASHINGTON — The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) today sanctioned three individuals for being officials of the Workers’ Party of Korea (WPK). These individuals have provided support to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s (DPRK) development of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and ballistic missiles.

On November 18, 2022, the DPRK launched an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), marking the eighth ICBM launch this year. This ICBM launch, along with the over 60 additional ballistic missile launches conducted by the DPRK in 2022, clearly violate multiple United Nations Security Council Resolutions (UNSCRs) and demonstrate a continued threat to international peace and security. Today’s action targets three individuals who have directly led DPRK organizations that are linked to the development of WMDs.

“Treasury is taking action in close trilateral coordination with the Republic of Korea and Japan against officials who have had leading roles in the DPRK’s unlawful WMD and ballistic missile programs,” said Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Brian E. Nelson. “Recent launches demonstrate the need for all countries to fully implement UN Security Council resolutions, which are intended to prevent the DPRK from acquiring the technologies, materials, and revenue Pyongyang needs to develop its prohibited WMD and ballistic missile capabilities.”

This action is in line with wider multilateral efforts to impede the DPRK’s ability to advance its unlawful WMD and ballistic missile programs that threaten regional stability.

### WPK OFFICIALS

OFAC is designating **Jon Il Ho**,** Yu Jin**, and** Kim Su Gil** for being officials of the WPK. OFAC’s action follows the European Union’s designation of Jon Il Ho, Yu Jin, and Kim Su Gil on April 21, 2022, as persons responsible for the DPRK’s WMD or ballistic missile programs.

While serving as the Vice Director and the Director, respectively, of the U.S.- and UN-designated Munitions Industry Department, Jon Il Ho and Yu Jin played major roles in the DPRK’s development of WMD in violation of multiple UNSCRs, and they have personally attended numerous ballistic missile launches since at least 2017.

Kim Su Gil served as Director of the U.S.-designated Korean People’s Army General Political Bureau from 2018 to 2021 and oversaw the implementation of WPK decisions related to the DPRK’s WMD program.

Jon Il Ho, Yu Jin, and Kim Su Gil are designated pursuant to E.O. 13687 for being officials of the WPK.

### SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, pursuant to E.O. 13687, all property and interests in property of the persons named above that are in the United States, or in the possession or control of U.S. persons, are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked.

In addition, persons that engage in certain transactions with the individuals or entities designated today may themselves be exposed to designation. Furthermore, any foreign financial institution that knowingly facilitates a significant transaction or provides significant financial services for any of the individuals or entities designated today could be subject to U.S. correspondent or payable-through account sanctions.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN) List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to OFAC’s[Frequently Asked Question 897.](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/faqs/897)

[For detailed information on the process to submit a request for removal from an OFAC sanctions list, please click here.](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list)

[Find identifying information on the individuals sanctioned today here.](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/recent-actions/20221201)

###
