---
title: U.S. and U.K. Target IRGC-QF Support to Hamas and Other Proxy Groups
date: 2023-12-14
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1987
---
WASHINGTON — Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) and the United Kingdom are jointly taking action against Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps – Qods Force (IRGC-QF), Hamas, and Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ). The U.K. is taking its first action pursuant to new Iran-related authorities, targeting eight actors, including the head of the IRGC-QF, and individuals linked to Iran’s support for Hamas and PIJ. The U.K.’s new sanctions authority has been developed to respond to unprecedented threats from the Iranian regime, including efforts to undermine peace and security across the Middle East and plots to kill individuals on U.K. soil. OFAC is designating an IRGC-QF official involved in support to Hamas.

“Treasury applauds the United Kingdom’s new Iran sanctions authorities, which will be instrumental in taking action against Iranian support to Hamas and other regional proxy groups that fan conflict and contribute to widespread suffering,” said Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo. “The United States continues to coordinate with our partners, including the United Kingdom, to tackle terrorist financing and threats from Iran.”

OFAC’s action today is being taken pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, as amended, which targets terrorist groups and their supporters. The IRGC-QF was designated pursuant to E.O. 13224 on October 25, 2007 for providing support to multiple terrorist groups.

Today, the U.K. is sanctioning eight actors affiliated with the IRGC-QF, Hamas, or PIJ, seven of whom have previously been designated by OFAC, including IRGC-QF commander Esmail Qaani and senior IRGC-QF official Muhammad Sa’id Izadi. IRGC-QF support has enabled Hamas’ and PIJ’s terrorist activities, to include the transfer of hundreds of millions of dollars in financial assistance and provision of weapons and operational training. In coordination with the U.K., OFAC is designating IRGC-QF official**Majid Zaree**(** Zaree**), who is involved in the IRGC-QF’s support to groups such as Hizballah and Hamas.

Zaree is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, the IRGC-QF. The IRGC-QF was designated pursuant to E.O. 13224 on October 25, 2007 for providing support to multiple terrorist groups.

### SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the individual that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons must be blocked and reported to OFAC. OFAC’s sanctions generally prohibit all dealings by U.S. persons or within the United States (including transactions transiting the United States) that involve any property or interests in property of blocked or designated persons.

In addition, persons that engage in certain transactions with the individual designated today may themselves be exposed to designation. Furthermore, any foreign financial institution that knowingly facilitates a significant transaction or provides significant financial services for the individual designated today could be subject to U.S. correspondent or payable-through account sanctions.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from its ability to designate and add persons to the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List), but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to[OFAC’s Frequently Asked Question 897](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20230914).

[Click here for identifying information on the individuals and entities designated today.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20231214)

###
