---
title: "PHOTOS: Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo's Visit to Nigeria"
date: 2023-09-21T17:01:25-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1758
---

Image 1: Deputy Secretary Adeyemo and Chargé d'Affaires David Greene meet with Nigerian financial institutions.

Image 2: Deputy Secretary Adeyemo tours Ogidi Studios with Idris Olorunnimbe, CEO of Temple Management Company.

Image 3: Deputy Secretary Adeyemo answers questions from the audience at Lagos Business School with Vice Chancellor Enase Odu Okonedo.

Image 4: Deputy Secretary Adeyemo observes a gallery of photos of Nigerian artists at Ogidi Studios.

Image 5: Deputy Secretary Adeyemo speaks with entrepreneurs from Vigilearn, a startup housed at Vibranium Valley.

Image 6: Deputy Secretary Adeyemo speaks with entrepreneurs from maxe, a startup housed at Vibranium Valley.

Image 7: Deputy Secretary Adeyemo speaks with Nigerian creator Bukunmi Adeaga-ilori (Kie Kie).

Image 8: Deputy Secretary Adeyemo hosts a dinner with Nigerian creators, entrepreneurs, and members of the Nigerin-American diaspora.

Image 9: Deputy Secretary Adeyemo tours Alara, a fashion concept store.

Image 10: Deputy Secretary Adeyemo tours and meets workers from Reelfruit, a fruit snacks company that received funding from USAID.

Image 11: Deputy Secretary Adeyemo tours Ogidi Studios with Idris Olorunnimbe, CEO of Temple Management Company.

Image 12: Deputy Secretary Adeyemo films a digital short with actress Bisola Aiyeola and creator Lilo Aderogba.

Image 13: Deputy Secretary Adeyemo gives remarks on the U.S. – Nigeria economic relationship at the Lagos Business School.
