---
title: Detailed Guidance and Press Schedule for Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen’s Travel to the IMF and World Bank Annual Meetings in Morocco and the Eurogroup Finance Ministers Meeting in Luxembourg
date: 2023-10-06
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1782
---
WASHINGTON – Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen will travel to Marrakech, Morocco, to represent the United States in the Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank Group (WBG) and participate in events on the margins from Tuesday, October 10, through Saturday, October 14. Secretary Yellen will then travel to Luxembourg, Luxembourg, to participate in the Eurogroup Finance Ministers Meeting on Monday, October 16.

During the Annual Meetings in Morocco, Secretary Yellen will engage counterparts on opportunities to bolster the global economy and address global challenges. Secretary Yellen will highlight the significant progress we have made on evolving multilateral development banks (MDB) since her call to action ahead of the Annual Meetings last year, so that they are better positioned to meet their economic development goals and address global challenges like climate change, pandemics, and conflict and fragility.

In Morocco, Secretary Yellen will also underscore that the United States and its global partners are united in their steadfast commitment to support Ukraine as it defends itself against Russia’s illegal war, and to working with countries to mitigate the global spillover effects of the war, including exacerbated food insecurity. She will also participate in a meeting of the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors and other events held at the margins of the Annual Meetings.

In Luxembourg, Secretary Yellen will build on the strong relationship between the United States and European Union, which has been crucial to driving sustainable, inclusive economic growth and advancing shared interests. She will engage counterparts to further deepen cooperation and advance shared economic priorities. This includes by bolstering the resilience and diversification of our critical supply chains. While in Luxembourg, Secretary Yellen will also work with European partners to coordinate our shared support for Ukraine. That includes through our global sanctions coalition which is denying Russia the revenue and equipment it needs to wage its illegal war, as well as our joint economic assistance to Ukraine. In meetings, Secretary Yellen will also discuss with partners ways of further aligning our respective economic relationships with China around shared principles.

### Marrakech, Morocco

#### Tuesday, October 10

At 3:15 PM WEST / 10:15 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will deliver major remarks at the Mohammed VI Polytechnic University on the progress being made in the effort to reform the MDBs to increase their effectiveness and impact. Prior to the remarks, she will participate in a tour of facilities that have been supported by the World Bank and meet with local researchers. Secretary Yellen’s remarks will be open press and [livestreamed here](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCt2FDbyyFrn_lw1gWwuBfgQ).

#### Wednesday, October 11

At 9:00 AM WEST / 4:00 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will hold a press conference at the Mohammed VI Museum for Water Civilization to highlight her key priorities for the Annual Meeting, including strengthening the global economy, driving additional progress toward MDB evolution, sustaining strong support for Ukraine’s resistance to Russia’s illegal war, and addressing debt structuring for developing countries. This event will be open press and will be [livestreamed here](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCt2FDbyyFrn_lw1gWwuBfgQ).

At 10:00 AM WEST / 5:00 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will host an IMF Roundtable, where she will bring together finance ministers and representatives from emerging market and developing countries to discuss IMF policy priorities, including quotas, Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust (PRGT) financing, and IMF governance. There will be an extended spray to cover the Secretary’s opening remarks at the beginning of this meeting for pre-credentialed media.

At 12:00 PM WEST / 7:00 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in the Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust (PRGT) Roundtable. This meeting will be closed press.

At 5:30 PM WEST / 12:30 PM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in the Ukraine Ministerial Roundtable, where she will deliver remarks underscoring the United States’ steadfast commitment to supporting Ukraine in its brave resistance to Russia’s illegal war and the importance of continued global economic support for Ukraine. More details to follow.

#### Thursday, October 12

At 9:45 AM WEST / 4:45 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in the World Bank Development Committee plenary meeting. This meeting will be closed press.

  

At 5:00 PM WEST / 12:00 PM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in the Global Sovereign Debt Roundtable. This meeting will be closed press.

At 6:30 PM WEST / 1:30 PM ET, Secretary Yellen will attend a working dinner for G20 finance ministers and central bank governors. This dinner will be closed press.

#### Friday, October 13

At 10:15 AM WEST / 5:15 PM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in the G20 Finance Ministerial meeting on the global economy and crypto assets. This meeting will be closed press.

At 2:00 PM WEST / 9:00 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will host a MDB Evolution Roundtable, where she will bring finance and development ministers from emerging market and developing countries and the G7 to discuss how reform efforts underway at the World Bank can support country development priorities. There will be an extended spray to cover the Secretary’s opening remarks at the beginning of this meeting for pre-credentialed media.

#### Saturday, October 14

At 8:00 AM WEST / 3:00 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in the International Monetary and Finance Committee working breakfast. This meeting will be closed press.

### Luxembourg, Luxembourg

#### Monday, October 16

At 12:30 PM CET / 6:30 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will have a working lunch with Eurogroup President Pascal Donohoe, European Commission Executive Vice President Valdis Dombrovskis, and European Commissioner for the Economy Paolo Gentiloni. This lunch will be closed press.

At 2:00 PM CET / 8:00 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will deliver remarks and participate in the Eurogroup Finance Ministers meeting. Secretary Yellen’s remarks will be open to pre-credentialed media. The remainder of the meeting will be closed press.

At 3:45 PM CET / 9:45 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in a press availability with Eurogroup President Pascal Donohue. This media availability will be open to pre-credentialed media and livestreamed. More details to follow.

While in Luxembourg, Secretary Yellen will also participate in bilateral meetings with counterparts and international partners.

###
