---
title: Detailed Press Guidance for Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen’s Travel to Paris France
date: 2023-06-21
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1554
---
WASHINGTON – Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen will travel to Paris, France to lead the U.S. delegation to the Summit for a New Global Financing Pact and hold related meetings on June 22 and June 23.

While in Paris, Secretary Yellen will further partnerships with emerging and developing economies to strengthen the world economy and address shared challenges like climate change. To accomplish that, the Secretary will build on our collective progress since her [call to action](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0997) to evolve the Multilateral Development Banks to better address global challenges like climate change, pandemics, and fragility and conflict at the speed and scale needed. Secretary Yellen will work to promote actions and policies that strengthen macroeconomic stability, including by addressing the debt challenges facing many emerging and developing economies. And, she will work with our partners to mobilize additional resources – including from the private sector – for key priorities like infrastructure, food security, and supporting resilient, clean energy supply chains and just energy transitions.

On June 22, at 8 AM CEST/ 2 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will hold a press conference ahead of the Summit. During her press conference, Secretary Yellen will outline priorities for the U.S. during the Summit, including furthering our work to evolve multilateral development banks, addressing debt vulnerability and strengthening the global economy, and mobilizing more financing, including from the private sector. The press conference will be open to pre-credentialed press and [livestreamed here](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCt2FDbyyFrn_lw1gWwuBfgQ).

9 AM CEST/ 3 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in the opening ceremony of the Summit for a New Global Financial Pact. The ceremony is open press for credentialed press.

10:10 AM CEST/4:10 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in a bilateral meeting with French Finance Minister Bruno Le Maire. There will be a photo spray for credentialed press.

10:30 AM CEST/ 4:30 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in a roundtable on Multilateral Development Bank (MDB) Evolution where she will deliver remarks outlining the significant progress made since her call to action, and will discuss the next steps. The roundtable will be open press.

11:45 AM CEST/ 5:45 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in a bilateral meeting with the President of Sir Lanka Ranil Wickremesinghe. There will be a top spray for credentialed press to cover the Secretary’s opening remarks.

1:45 PM CEST/ 7:45 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in a bilateral meeting with President of Ghana Akufo Addo. There will be a top spray for credentialed press to cover the Secretary’s opening remarks.

At 2:20 PM CEST/8:20 PM ET, Secretary Yellen will hold a bilateral meeting with the President of the European Commission Ursula Von Der Leyen. There will be a top spray for credentialed press to cover the Secretary’s opening remarks.

3 PM CEST / 9 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in a Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ) Capital Mobilization Roundtable. The roundtable is closed press.

Secretary Yellen will also hold a bilateral meeting with the President of Comoros Azali Assoumani while in Paris. There will be a top spray for credentialed press to cover the Secretary’s opening remarks.

In the evening, Secretary Yellen will participate in a State Dinner hosted by President of France Emmanuel Macron. The arrival is open press for credentialed media.

On Friday, June 23 at 7:30 AM CEST / 1 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will host a breakfast with the U.S. Embassy in Paris, bringing together heads of state and heads of delegation representing a diverse set of countries, including Barbados Prime Minister Mia Mottley, President of Kenya William Ruto, Indonesia Finance Minister Sri Mulyani, Netherland Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Sigrid Kaag, along with other stakeholders from the Open Society Foundation and the Rockefeller Foundation  During the breakfast, Secretary Yellen will deliver opening remarks highlighting the importance of mobilizing additional private sector capital to advance priorities like reducing poverty and combatting climate change. There will be a top spray for credentialed press to cover the Secretary’s opening remarks.

At 9 AM CEST / 3 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in a family photo at the Summit for a New Global Financial Pact. The family photo is open for credentialed press.

At 9:15 AM CEST/ 3:15 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in the closing ceremony for the Summit. The closing ceremony is open for credentialed press.

At 9:30 AM CEST/ 3:30 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in a high-level panel with heads of delegations moderated by President of France Emmanuel Macron. The panel is open for credentialed press.

At 11:40 AM CEST/5:40 AM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in a press conference with heads of delegations, leaders of international financial institutions, and President Macron. The press conference is open to credentialed media will be [livestreamed here.](https://npfm23.site.calypso-event.net/en/virtual/attente.htm)
