---
title: Joint 10-Year Plans for the U.S. Strategy to Prevent Conflict and Promote Stability
date: 2023-03-27
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1368
---
*The following is being released jointly by the U.S. Department of State, the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the U.S. Department of Defense, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID). *

On Friday, President Biden announced 10-year plans for implementing the U.S. Strategy to Prevent Conflict and Promote Stability in partnership with Haiti, Libya, Mozambique, Papua New Guinea, and Coastal West Africa, including Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, and Togo. These plans represent a commitment to global peace and security, with the United States working alongside an array of local partners toward shared, long-term goals of conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

The Strategy and these plans draw on lessons learned and identify innovative approaches to support locally driven solutions, strengthen resilience, and forge a more peaceful and democratic future. The Department of State, USAID, and the Department of Defense are working together to facilitate greater coordination and collaboration at all levels and leveraging our respective roles to advance diplomatic, development, security, and programmatic efforts. The Department of State and USAID are designing flexible, adaptive programs that empower our local government, civil society, and civilian security partners. The Department of Defense is supporting civil-military engagement, training and equipping of partner militaries, defense institutional capacity building, and the professionalization of security forces. The Department of the Treasury is leading engagements with international financial institutions to coordinate our assistance in line with these plans.

This effort builds on the vision of the bipartisan Global Fragility Act and ongoing engagement with Congressional leaders and key stakeholders ranging from local civil society, community leaders, academics, and the private sector. Through intensive coordination, continual assessment, and monitoring and evaluation, together we will use these 10-year plans to address drivers of conflict and violence collectively and to support our partner countries in pursuing peace and prosperity.

More information can be found at [https://www.state.gov/stability-strategy/](https://www.state.gov/stability-strategy/)
