---
title: Government of Indonesia and International Partners Launch Just Energy Transition Partnership Secretariat to Drive Indonesia’s Energy Transformation
date: 2023-02-16
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1278
---
Today, the Government of Indonesia and the co-leads of the International Partners Group launched the Secretariat for the Just Energy Transition Partnership (JETP) as part of a week-long series of events and planning meetings for this ground-breaking initiative.  The Secretariat, hosted in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR) and supported by the Asian Development Bank, will serve as the coordinator for internal and external stakeholders on the JETP.  The Secretariat will also play an important planning and project development function for the JETP.

In Bali, Indonesia in November 2022, at the G20 Leaders’ Summit, Indonesia and leaders of the International Partners Group (IPG), co-led by the United States and Japan, and including Canada, Denmark, the European Union, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, and the United Kingdom, launched a partnership in support of ambitious new targets for Indonesia’s just energy sector transition.  To achieve these targets, an initial $20 billion in public and private financing over a three-to-five-year period will be mobilized and deployed through the coordination of the JETP Secretariat.

“The setup of the JETP Secretariat is a critical milestone.  The Secretariat will manage the day-to-day implementation of Indonesia’s energy transition to low carbon that is sustainable, just, and supportive of Indonesia’s economic growth,” said Rachmat Kaimuddin, Deputy Coordinating Minister for Infrastructure and Transportation, MARVES.

The Secretariat will support the Government of Indonesia in achieving the JETP objectives including, in the next six months, developing a comprehensive investment and policy plan that reflects targeted greenhouse gas emissions reductions and support to impacted communities.

Director General for New, Renewable Energy and Energy Conservation, MEMR, Dadan Kusdiana, Deputy Coordinating Minister Rachmat Kaimuddin, and Nani Hendiarti, Deputy Minister for Environmental Management and Forestry, MARVES, were joined by IPG representatives Alexia Latortue (Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Treasury for International Trade and Development), Rick Duke (Deputy Special Envoy for Climate at the U.S. Department of State) and Tomoyoshi Yahagi (Deputy Director General of the Ministry of Finance of Japan) to visit the MEMR, which hosts the Secretariat in its offices with institutional support and implementation capacity from the Asian Development Bank.

“Indonesia’s just energy sector transformation requires many partners and tools.  The JETP Secretariat is a place where these come together in the service of our shared commitments,” Assistant Secretary Alexia Latortue said.

The United States, Japan and the Government of Indonesia invited the private financial institutions convened by the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ) to support Indonesia’s energy transition in a roundtable discussion on investment in Indonesia’s energy transition.

“The Secretariat will contribute to accelerating successful implementation of the JETP.  We are hopeful that it would provide a good model of a just transition towards net zero to the region and to the entire world,” Deputy Director General Tomoyoshi Yahagi said.

The delegations and GOI representatives also continued an inclusive dialogue with civil society organizations to share information, to understand concerns of impacted communities, and to listen to views on job creation, transparency, and other just transition topics.

“This JETP puts Indonesia at the forefront of the global transition to clean and affordable energy.  With the Secretariat now in place, we are eager to implement the JETP’s ambitious renewable energy goals to power low-carbon economic growth and secure a safe climate future," Deputy Special Envoy for Climate Rick Duke said.

###
