---
title: Treasury Sanctions Two South Sudanese Officials Responsible for Conflict-Related Sexual Violence
date: 2023-06-20T10:30:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1552
---
WASHINGTON — Today, following the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) designated two South Sudanese individuals involved in conflict-related sexual violence (CRSV) in South Sudan. The two individuals designated today have abused their positions of political and military authority to carry out acts of sexual violence against citizens of South Sudan. Today’s designations, along with sanctions on ISIS leaders by the U.S. Department of State, represent the first time that a dedicated focus on conflict-related sexual violence —consistent with the [Presidential Memorandum](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/11/28/presidential-memorandum-to-promote-accountability-for-conflict-related-sexual-violence/#:~:text=The%20Biden%2DHarris%20Administration%20stands,expanding%20access%20to%20justice%3B%20enhancing) signed by President Biden in November 2022 —has led to the imposition of U.S. sanctions.

“The United States rejects all forms of sexual violence—which women and children bear the brunt of—in armed conflict,” said Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo. “We remain committed to holding perpetrators and enablers of conflict-related sexual violence accountable so long as this scourge exists.”

## JAMES NANDO

James Nando is a Major General in the South Sudan People’s Defense Forces. Between June and September 2021, forces loyal to Nando fighting in Western Equatoria were responsible for at least 64 instances of rape and sexual slavery against civilians. Between April and August 2018, Nando directly or through his commanders, officers, and fighters subordinate to him oversaw the abduction of at least 505 women and 63 girls. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan documented 43 cases of rape and gang-rape that occurred during these attacks. Nando was aware of these abuses and did not prevent, discourage, or punish fighters responsible for sexual violence when it happened under his watch, thereby encouraging fighters to continue these abuses.

James Nando was designated pursuant to E.O. 13664 for being responsible for or complicit in, or for having engaged in, directly or indirectly, any of the following in or in relation to South Sudan: the targeting of women, children, or any civilians through the commission of acts of violence (including killing, maiming, torture, or rape or other sexual violence), abduction, forced displacement, or attacks on schools, hospitals, religious sites, or locations where civilians are seeking refuge, or through conduct that would constitute a serious abuse or violation of human rights or a violation of international humanitarian law.

## ALFRED FUTUYO

Alfred Futuyo is Governor of Western Equatoria and affiliated with the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army – In Opposition. Between April and August 2018, forces under Futuyo’s command carried out numerous attacks in Western Equatoria that resulted in the abduction of 887 civilians, of which at least 43 were raped or gang-raped.

Alfred Futuyo was designated pursuant to E.O. 13664 for being responsible for or complicit in, or for having engaged in, directly or indirectly, any of the following in or in relation to South Sudan: the targeting of women, children, or any civilians through the commission of acts of violence (including killing, maiming, torture, or rape or other sexual violence), abduction, forced displacement, or attacks on schools, hospitals, religious sites, or locations where civilians are seeking refuge, or through conduct that would constitute a serious abuse or violation of human rights or a violation of international humanitarian law.

## SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of these persons that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all dealings by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from its ability to designate and add persons to the SDN List, but also from OFAC’s willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to [OFAC’s Frequently Asked Question 897 here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/897). For detailed information on the process to [submit a request for removal from an OFAC sanctions list, please click here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[For more information on the individuals designated today, click here.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20230620)

