---
title: "Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen at Lunch with Business Leaders from American Chamber of Commerce in Dakar, Senegal"
date: 2023-01-20
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1200
press_release_number: JY1200
---

As Prepared for Delivery
Thank you all for being here today.  I am very grateful to be joined by a group of impressive business leaders in Senegal.
An overriding focus of my trip to Africa is the enormous economic potential of the continent, thanks to its demographic trends and the impressive dynamism of its entrepreneurs.
I saw that spirit firsthand earlier today at DER/FJ, an incubator that works to support new businesses from both young and women Senegalese entrepreneurs.
The U.S. is committed to working with Africa to realize that promise, because we know that a stronger African economy is good for the world, and good for the United States.
An enormous strength that the U.S. brings to our partnership with Africa is the vibrancy of U.S. companies.  We believe that increased business-to-business engagement will create great opportunities for both our countries.
Indeed, a major focus of the U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit of last month was the importance of deepening trade and investment links.
I look forward to hearing how you see the opportunities here in Senegal and across the region.  In addition, I would welcome your thoughts on the improvements needed to facilitate trade and investment, and the types of support that are most helpful to investors.
With that, I would like to hear about your backgrounds and experience, particularly what drew you to work in Senegal.  What led you to where you are today?
###
