---
title: Treasury Targets Additional Sources of Support and Financing to Hamas
date: 2023-10-27
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1845
---
WASHINGTON — Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) imposed a second round of sanctions on key Hamas-linked officials and financial networks following the October 7 barbaric attacks on Israel and its civilian population. Today’s action targets additional assets in Hamas’s investment portfolio and individuals who are facilitating sanctions evasion by Hamas-affiliated companies. Treasury is also designating a Hamas official in Iran and members of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), as well as a Gaza-based entity that has served as a conduit for illicit Iranian funds to Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ).

“Today’s action underscores the United States’ commitment to dismantling Hamas’s funding networks by deploying our counterterrorism sanctions authorities and working with our global partners to deny Hamas the ability to exploit the international financial system,” said Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo. “We will not hesitate to take action to further degrade Hamas’s ability to commit horrific terrorist attacks by relentlessly targeting its financial activities and streams of funding.”

This action builds on OFAC’s recent[October 18 designation of Hamas operatives and financial facilitators](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1816), as well as its[May 2022 designation of officials and companies involved in managing Hamas’s secret international investment portfolio](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0798). Individuals targeted today play a key role in operating companies in Hamas’s investment portfolio in circumvention of the sanctions imposed by Treasury. Today’s designations also underscore the critical role Iran plays in providing financial, logistical, and operational support to Hamas. These actions contribute to the U.S. Government’s robust work with regional and global partners to disrupt Hamas’s vital lines of funding by leveraging the unique tools and expertise of a coalition dedicated to building a more secure Middle East region. These individuals are being designated pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, as amended, which targets terrorist groups and their supporters.

### TARGETING IRAN’S SUPPORT FOR TERRORISM

**Khaled Qaddoumi**(** Qaddoumi**) is a Jordanian national and longtime Hamas member who currently lives in Tehran serving as Hamas’s representative to Iran, and acting as a liaison between Hamas and the Iranian government.** Qaddoumi**works to maintain strong relationships with Iran by attending delegation meetings with high-ranking Iranian officials and praising Iranian support for Hamas, including its provision of weapons.

** Ali Morshed Shirazi**and** Mostafa Mohammad Khani**are Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-Qods Force (IRGC-QF) officials who train and assist PIJ, Hamas and Hizballah.

** Ali Ahmad Faizullahi**is an Iran-based commander of the Saberin Special Forces Brigade of the IRGC Ground Force. The Saberin Brigade has deployed to Syria and has provided training to Hamas and Hizballah. The unit has also played a role in the violent suppression of domestic protests in Iran.

The Iranian Bonyad Shahid, also known as the Martyrs Foundation, which was designated in 2007, provides millions of dollars through the Gaza-based and PIJ-affiliated** Al-Ansar Charity Association **(** Al-Ansar**) for the families of terrorists affiliated with Hamas and PIJ. Al-Ansar** ** claims to provide funds to families affiliated with these terrorist groups as an extension of Iranian support to the Palestinian people, but the funding ultimately serves as a recruiting tool for terrorist activities. Some of the funds have been provided through the branches of Gaza-based Islamic National Bank, which was designated pursuant to E.O. 13224 in 2010 for being controlled by Hamas.

**Nasser Al Sheikh Ali**(** Al Sheikh Ali**) is the director of PIJ-affiliated Al-Ansar and has announced financial awards from the Martyrs Foundation given to the families affiliated with Palestinian terrorist groups. Al Sheikh Ali has publicly acknowledged Iran’s support from the Martyrs Foundation to Al-Ansar, intended to provide financial assistance to families of Palestinian terrorist groups that have conducted terrorist attacks targeting Israel.

Khaled Qaddoumi is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Hamas.

Ali Morshed Shirazi and Mostafa Mohammad Khani** ** are being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, the IRGC-QF. Ali Ahmad Faizullahi is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, the IRGC.

Al-Ansar Charity Association is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for having materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, the U.S.-designated Martyrs Foundation, Hamas, and PIJ. Nasser Al Sheikh Ali is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Al-Ansar Charity Association.

### HAMAS INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO ASSETS AND INDIVIDUALS

#### Companies Owned by Abdelbasit Hamza Elhassan Mohamed Khair

Sudan-based Hamas financier Abdelbasit Hamza Elhassan Mohamed Khair (Hamza), whom OFAC designated as an SDGT on October 18, is the CEO and beneficial owner** ** of Sudan-based company** Zawaya Group for Development and Investment Co. LTD** and Spain-based company**Zawaya Group for Development Investment Sociedad Limitada**.

** Larrycom for Investment Company**is a Sudan-based company in which Hamza is a top executive; the company is also indirectly owned by Hamza through Zawaya Group for Development and Investment Co. LTD.

Zawaya Group for Development and Investment Co. LTD, Zawaya Group for Development Investment Sociedad Limitada, and Larrycom for Investment Company** ** are being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for being owned, controlled, or directed by, directly or indirectly, Abdelbasit Hamza Elhassan Mohamed Khair.

#### Individuals Active in Designated Investment Portfolio Companies

Türkiye-based company Trend GYO, designated in May 2022 as part of Hamas’s investment portfolio, is a key component of Hamas’s global asset holdings which had previously been estimated to be worth over $500 million. Trend GYO currently has three primary shareholders: Türkiye-based**Alaeddin Senguler**,** Gulsah Yigidoglu**, and** Arwa Mangoush**.

Alaeddin Senguler, Gulsah Yigidoglu, and Arwa Mangoush are being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for having materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, Hamas.

In addition to today’s designations, the Department of State’s Rewards for Justice (RFJ) program offers up to millions of dollars in rewards for information on certain activities and leaders of Hamas. Please visit the[RFJ website](https://rfj.tips/DZdf3s)for more information and how to report information securely.

### SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated persons described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons.

In addition, financial institutions and other persons that engage in certain transactions or activities with sanctioned entities and individuals may expose themselves to sanctions or be subject to an enforcement action. The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any designated person, or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the SDN List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to[OFAC’s Frequently Asked Question 897 here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20230914). For detailed information on the process to submit a request for[removal from an OFAC sanctions list, please click here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

Treasury remains committed to enabling the flow of legitimate humanitarian assistance supporting the basic human needs of vulnerable populations, while continuing to deny resources to malicious actors. Accordingly, OFAC sanctions programs contain[provisions for legitimate humanitarian support to vulnerable populations](https://ofac.treasury.gov/media/931341/download?inline), including authorizations for certain humanitarian transactions in support of nongovernmental organizations’ activities. For more information, please review relevant authorizations and guidance on[OFAC’s website](https://ofac.treasury.gov/).

[For identifying information related to today’s action, click here.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20231027)

Additional Treasury resources on countering the financing of terrorism:

- [FinCEN Alert to Financial Institutions to Counter Financing to Hamas and its Terrorist Activities](https://www.fincen.gov/sites/default/files/2023-10/FinCEN_Alert_Terrorist_Financing_FINAL508.pdf)
- [2022 National Terrorist Financing Risk Assessment](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/2022-National-Terrorist-Financing-Risk-Assessment.pdf)
- [National Strategy for Combatting Terrorist and Other Illicit Financing](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/2022-National-Strategy-for-Combating-Terrorist-and-Other-Illicit-Financing.pdf)
- [Action Plan to Address Illicit Financing Risks of Digital Assets](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/Digital-Asset-Action-Plan.pdf)
- [FATF Report: Virtual Assets Red Flag Indicators of Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing](https://www.fatf-gafi.org/en/publications/Methodsandtrends/Virtual-assets-red-flag-indicators.html)
- [Terrorist Financing Targeting Center](https://www.tftc-istehdaf.org/)

###
