---
title: "Statement by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen on the appointment of Andrea Gacki as FinCEN Director"
date: 2023-07-13
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1610
press_release_number: JY1610
---

WASHINGTON- Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen issued the following statement on the appointment of Andrea Gacki as Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) Director.
“For over two decades and across five presidential administrations, Andrea Gacki has been the consummate public servant. She has demonstrated the very best that Treasury has to offer throughout her various roles with the Department, including serving as acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence for nearly a year. During her time as Director of OFAC, Andrea guided the office through major world events, including most recently, its role countering Russia’s illegal and unprovoked war against Ukraine, where she helped design our unprecedented sanctions strategy. She expertly deploys Treasury’s financial tools, from financial sanctions to industry guidance and enforcement actions, to hold accountable those who threaten our national security and the international financial system. Andrea is simply an unparalleled fighter against the scourge of illicit finance.  As FinCEN embarks on its most ambitious project in recent years – bringing transparency to corporate ownership and protecting the U.S. financial system – there’s no one I trust more to lead the office than Andrea. Andrea’s encyclopedic knowledge of policy, her deep global relationships, and her steady leadership will ensure the Bureau continues to set the international standard for combatting financial crimes.
I also thank Himamauli Das for his service as Acting Director of FinCEN during a critical moment in the Bureau’s history, and his leadership across a range of issues, including our response to Russia’s illegal invasion.”
###
