---
title: U.S.  Department of the Treasury Announces Approval of Federal Funds to Improve Workforce Training, Education, and Health Monitoring in Washington, D.C
date: 2023-12-11
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1975
---
*Funds awarded through President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda*

WASHINGTON — Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced the approval of $22.5 million in federal funds for a multi-purpose community facility providing health care, education, and workforce services in Washington, D.C. as a part of President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda. These federal resources will go towards the expansion of Whitman-Walker’s [Max Robinson Center](https://www.whitman-walker.org/locations/max-robinson-center/) at the St. Elizabeth’s East Campus – an organization that provides critical health care services to underserved communities, particularly to the LGBTQ community. The Max Robinson Center also provides education and training around LGBTQ health, HIV care, and other areas of Whitman-Walker’s experience and expertise.

This funding – part of the American Rescue Plan’s (ARP)[Capital Projects Fund](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/coronavirus/assistance-for-state-local-and-tribal-governments/capital-projects-fund)(CPF) – will enable the center to increase access to health care services for residents through telehealth and in-person visits, accepting an estimated 10,000 new patients by 2025, in addition to the 5,000 patients currently served. Specifically, part of this investment will allow the Center to build two multipurpose community spaces that will support community health and wellness initiatives, as well as 63 exam, therapy, and consult rooms which will enable expanded telemedicine services. The expanded center will also provide public access to computer terminals and high-speed wireless broadband internet throughout the building. Community space in the center will be used to host resume building and interview skills workshops as well as education and training programs focused on community residents.

“Connecting workers and families to training, education, and health care services is central to expanding economic opportunity and prosperity in communities across the country,” said Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo. “The expansion of Whitman-Walker’s Max Robinson Center, financed in part by the American Rescue Plan’s Capital Projects Fund, shows how the Biden-Harris Administration’s historic investments are building projects needed to expand access to critical health and educational services.”

“This investment in Whitman-Walker will spur innovation and create new career and care opportunities for our residents – right here on the St. Elizabeths East campus in Ward 8,” said DC Mayor Muriel Bowser. “We are grateful for this investment from the Biden Administration and for recognizing the critical role that Whitman-Walker plays in building a healthier and more equitable DC.”

The CPF provides a total of $10 billion to states, territories, freely associated states, and Tribal governments to fund critical capital projects that expand economic opportunities and provide internet connectivity in communities with unmet needs. Through high-speed internet, digital technology, and multi-purpose community facility investments such as the one being announced today, CPF funding is both closing the digital divide and bringing workforce, education, and health care services to communities in need.

Today's announcement represents 21% of Washington, D.C.’s total CPF allocation of approximately $107 million. Washington, D.C. submitted plans for the remainder of their CPF funds and these plans are currently being reviewed by the Treasury Department.

The Treasury Department began announcing state awards in [June 2022](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1526). To date, CPF has awarded approximately $9 billion for broadband, digital technology, and multi-purpose community center projects in all states and the District of Columbia, which these states estimate will reach over two million locations with expanded internet access, in addition to the hundreds of thousands of individuals who will be served annually by multi-purpose community facilities.

