---
title: Treasury Department Announces Approval of Federal Funds to Connect 20,000 Oklahoma Homes and Businesses to Affordable, High-Speed Internet as Part of President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda
date: 2023-09-08T12:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1722
---
*To date, the Capital Projects Fund has awarded over $8 billion for broadband, digital technology, and multi-purpose community center projects in nearly all states and three territories, estimated to reach over two million locations*

WASHINGTON — Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced the approval of $167.7 million for high-speed internet projects in Oklahoma under the American Rescue Plan’s [Capital Projects Fund](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/coronavirus/assistance-for-state-local-and-tribal-governments/capital-projects-fund)(CPF), which the state estimates will connect approximately 20,000 homes and businesses to affordable, high-speed internet as a part of President Biden’s Investing in America agenda. A key priority of the CPF program is expanding economic opportunities and providing internet connectivity in communities with unmet needs.

“The pandemic upended life as we knew it and exposed the stark inequity in access to affordable and reliable high-speed internet in communities across the country, including rural, Tribal, and other underrepresented communities,” said Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo. “This funding is a key piece of the Biden-Harris Administration’s historic investments to increase access to high-speed internet for millions of Americans and provide more opportunities to fully participate and compete in the 21st century economy.”

CPF provides a total of $10 billion to states, territories, freely associated states, and Tribal governments to fund critical capital projects that enable work, education, and health monitoring. In addition to the $10 billion provided by CPF, many governments are putting a portion of their State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds (SLFRF) toward meeting the Biden-Harris Administration’s goal of connecting every American household to affordable, reliable high-speed internet. Together, these ARP programs and the BIL are working in tandem with President Biden’s Investing in America agenda to close the digital divide – deploying high-speed internet to those without access and lowering costs for those who cannot afford it.

[Oklahoma](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/Oklahoma_CPF_Award_FactSheet.pdf) is approved to receive $167.7 million for broadband infrastructure projects, which the state estimates will connect approximately 20,000 homes and businesses to affordable, high-speed internet. The state’s allocation will fund the Oklahoma Broadband Infrastructure Grants (OBIG) Program, a competitive grant program designed to reduce the financial barriers for internet service providers to build out broadband infrastructure in areas of the state where infrastructure investment has historically been cost prohibitive due to population density and geographic constraints. As reported by Oklahoma, estimates show that investments made using the Capital Projects Fund will serve ~13% of locations still lacking high-speed internet access in the state. The plan approved by the Treasury Department today represents 100% of the state’s total allocation under the Capital Project Funds program.

In accordance with the Treasury Department’s guidance, each state’s plan requires service providers to participate in the Federal Communications Commission’s (FCC) new [Affordable Connectivity Program](https://www.fcc.gov/acp)(ACP). The Affordable Connectivity Program, funded by President Biden’s Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, helps ensure that households can afford high-speed internet by providing a discount of up to $30 per month (or up to $75 per eligible household on Tribal lands). Experts estimate that nearly 40% of U.S. households are eligible for the program.

To further lower costs, President Biden and Vice President Harris announced last year that the Administration had secured commitments from 20 leading internet service providers—covering more than 80% of the U.S. population—to offer all ACP-eligible households high-speed, reliable internet plans for no more than $30 per month. As a result of this agreement and the ACP, eligible households can receive internet access at no cost and can check their eligibility and sign up at [GetInternet.gov](https://www.whitehouse.gov/getinternet/). Already, President Biden’s Investing in America agenda has delivered affordable, high-speed internet to over 20 million American households, through these CPF investments funded by the ARP, and through the Affordable Connectivity Program funded by the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL).

The Treasury Department began announcing state awards in [June 2022](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1526). To date, CPF has awarded over $8 billion for broadband, digital technology, and multi-purpose community center projects, which states and territories estimate will reach over two million locations, in addition to the tens of thousands of individuals who will be served annually by multi-purpose community facilities.

