---
title: 'MEDIA ADVISORY: Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo to Travel to Europe'
date: 2023-07-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1598
---
WASHINGTON – Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo will travel to Europe from July 9 – 15 to discussed shared economic opportunities from the Inflation Reduction Act, securing clean energy supply chains, and continued coordination on countering sanctions evasion. Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will visit Belgium, Brussels; Frankfurt and Berlin, Germany; and Rome, Italy.

In Brussels, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will meet with officials at the European Commission to discuss partnership with allies and partners to build reliable clean energy supply chains to support green economic transitions. They will also discuss shared work to counter efforts by Russia to evade the sanctions and export controls imposed by a coalition of over 35 countries for its brutal war against Ukraine. In recent months, U.S. and E.U. officials have jointly traveled to countries that have served as transshipment points for dual-used goods flowing to Russia to offer technical assistance and clarify risk. While in Belgium, the Deputy Secretary will also meet with private sector representatives to discuss strengthening the critical mineral supply chain.

In Frankfurt, the Deputy Secretary will convene a banking roundtable to hear perspectives on the macroeconomic outlook and financial conditions in Europe.  He will also meet with critical minerals industry participants to discuss the importance of resilient supply chains. In Berlin, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will see government counterparts to discuss a wide range of issues, including curbing the transshipment of Western-made dual use components to Russia, European investments in clean energy deployment, and combatting climate change.

In Rome, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will meet with government officials to discuss clean energy, Russia sanctions, the G7 agenda, and strengthening the global economy.

###
