---
title: "Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen Ahead of Bilateral Meeting with Minister of Finance Sri Mulyani Indrawati of Indonesia in San Francisco, California"
date: 2023-11-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1898
press_release_number: JY1898
---

As Prepared for Delivery
Minister Sri Mulyani, thank you for joining us here in San Francisco for the APEC ministerial meetings.
This is a particularly exciting time for bilateral relations between the United States and Indonesia, as the timing of our ministerial coincides with President Jokowi’s visit to Washington—marking a new phase of bilateral cooperation and friendship between the world’s second- and third-largest democracies.
I would like to thank Indonesia for your strong support of the United States’ APEC host year and your collaboration on the key policy areas, including sustainable finance, digital assets, and modern supply side economics.
I would also like to congratulate the Government of Indonesia for releasing the Comprehensive Investment and Policy Plan for public consultation under the Just Energy Transition Partnership. We look forward to celebrating the launch of the plan at COP-28.
Congratulations as well on achieving full membership in the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). Indonesia has successfully demonstrated a firm commitment to meet global Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism standards, and the U.S. Treasury welcomes the collective work we’ll pursue through the FATF to counter illicit finance.
I look forward to our discussion.
###
