---
title: U.S. Department of the Treasury Announces New Federal Funds to Help Close the Digital Divide in Wisconsin Through President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda 
date: 2023-12-14
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1993
---
*To date, the Capital Projects Fund has awarded $9 billion for broadband, digital technology, and multi-purpose community center projects in all 50 states, which those states estimate will reach more than 2 million locations*

WASHINGTON — Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced the approval of $140 million in federal funds for Wi-Fi and computers and improving multi-purpose community facilities in Wisconsin under the American Rescue Plan’s[Capital Projects Fund](https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/coronavirus/assistance-for-state-local-and-tribal-governments/capital-projects-fund)(CPF), part of President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda. A key priority of the CPF program is expanding economic opportunities and promoting connectivity in communities with unmet needs.

“Expanding internet access is central to expanding economic opportunity in communities across the country,” said Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo. “This funding is a key part of the Biden-Harris Administration’s historic investments to increase access to high-speed internet for millions of Americans and provide more opportunities to fully participate in the 21st century economy.”

“High-speed internet is a necessity for Wisconsinites across the state to run their businesses, attend school, manage their farms, and connect with friends and family,” said Senator Baldwin. “I am proud to bring home this investment to connect families and businesses with reliable broadband – ensuring more Wisconsinites can fully participate in the economy, kids get the education they deserve, and families can connect with loved ones across the world.”

“We’ve come a long way to expand access to high-speed internet access in Wisconsin and build the local infrastructure needed to close the digital divide. Thanks to our efforts since 2019, more than 395,000 homes and businesses in Wisconsin will have new or improved service,” said Governor Evers. “Meaningfully investing in expanding high-speed internet access must be one of our top priorities to ensure our industries, families, and communities continue to grow and prosper. With these new programs, we will have more opportunities to invest in the services that ensure both Wisconsinites and our state are prepared to meet the needs of the 21st century.”

The CPF provides a total of $10 billion to states, territories, freely associated states, and Tribal governments to fund critical capital projects that expand economic opportunities and provide internet connectivity in communities with unmet needs. Through high-speed internet, digital technology, and multi-purpose community facility investments such as the ones being announced today, CPF funding is both closing the digital divide and bringing workforce, education, and health care services to communities in need.

Wisconsin’s awards include two funding streams: $33 million for digital connectivity technology projects, and $107 million for multi-purpose community facility projects. The first award will fund a competitive grant program administered by the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin that allows non-profits and other eligible entities to apply for funding to deploy computers and other devices, install Wi-Fi equipment in targeted multi-dwelling units, and provide digital navigation services to help residents use the devices for work, education, and health monitoring. The second award will fund the state’s Flexible Facilities Program, a competitive grant program to assist communities in funding improvements to facilities such as libraries and community centers. These awards are in addition to $42 million in CPF broadband infrastructure funding that Treasury[announced](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0999)in 2022.

The Treasury Department began announcing state awards in[June 2022](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1526). To date, CPF has awarded approximately $9 billion for broadband, digital technology, and multi-purpose community center projects in all states and the District of Columbia, which these states estimate will reach over two million locations with expanded internet access, in addition to the hundreds of thousands of individuals who will be served annually by multi-purpose community facilities.

###
