---
title: "Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen at Launch of Bicentennial Anniversary 20-Peso Coin in Mexico City, Mexico"
date: 2023-12-06
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1957
press_release_number: JY1957
---

As Prepared for Delivery
Good afternoon. I’m glad to be able to be part of this exciting event. Last December, the United States and Mexico celebrated the bicentennial of U.S.-Mexico relations.
This December, here in Mexico City, I’m proud to help launch a 20-peso coin commemorating this milestone.
This 20-peso coin represents the bilateral relationship that the United States and Mexico have maintained and grown for two centuries.
This relationship remains extremely strong today. From increasing trade and investment, to illicit drug trafficking, to the many other areas of collaboration we are discussing during my trip here—Mexico is a key partner of the United States. The United States is of course a key partner of Mexico as well.
As this new coin starts to circulate in the months ahead, I hope that it will be a tangible reminder to those who use it of the long history between our countries and of the strength of our current partnership.
As we continue to see new opportunities for the U.S.-Mexico relationship and in the region, the coin also represents the work we will do in the years to come.
Thank you to the Bank of Mexico for their work in developing this coin and to all of you for being here today on this important occasion.
I’ll now turn the floor over to Governor Rodríguez.
###
