---
title: 'MEDIA ADVISORY: Detailed Schedule for Annual Freedman’s Bank Forum Hosted by the Treasury Department'
date: 2023-10-24
draft: false
url: /press-releases/jy1839
---
WASHINGTON – Tomorrow, Wednesday, October 25, the U.S. Department of the Treasury is hosting the annual Freedman’s Bank Forum featuring U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen and senior Biden-Harris Administration officials, as well as key leaders from the public, private, nonprofit, and philanthropic sectors. The conference will highlight the Administration’s efforts to increase economic opportunity for communities of color and continue to close the racial wealth gap.

A detailed schedule is available below. All times approximate.

**10:00 AM**: Welcome remarks from U.S. Department of the Treasury Chief of Staff Didem Nisanci.

**10:05 AM**: Panel discussion: A Moment for Bold Ideas and Courageous Action

- Moderated by NBC Contributor Anthony Coley, featuring White House Domestic Policy Advisor Neera Tanden, Roosevelt Institute President and CEO Felicia Wong, and former President of Entertainment for Telemundo and SELF MADE author Nely Galán.

**10:40 AM**: Video remarks from Vice President of the United States Kamala Harris.

**10:45 AM**: Panel introduction from U.S. Representative and Ranking Member of the House Financial Services Committee Maxine Waters.

**10:50 AM**: Panel discussion: Scaling Underserved Businesses through Capital and Ecosystem Support,

- Moderated by Interim President of the Brookings Institution Amy Liu, featuring Deputy Secretary of the Department of Commerce Don Graves, Unshackled Ventures founding partner Manan Mehta, and Optus Bank President and CEO Dominik Mjartan.

**11:30 AM**: Panel discussion: Driving Economic Opportunity through Supply Chain and Business Partner Diversity

- Moderated by Cofounder of What Works Plus Xav Briggs, featuring Director of the White House Office of Intergovernmental Affairs Tom Perez, Chief Financial Officer of Micron Technology Mark Murphy, and Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of KeyBank Chris Gorman.

**1:50 PM**: Video remarks from U.S. Representative and House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries.

**1:55 PM**: Panel discussion: Delivering Economic Investments Across America

- Moderated by Director of the White House Office of Public Engagement Steve Benjamin, featuring Mayor of Savannah, Georgia, Van R. Johnson, President and CEO of the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights Maya Wiley, and President and COO of the Skoll Foundation Marla Blow.

**2:30 PM**: Closing Keynote Remarks from Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen.

**WHERE**:  U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room, 1500 Pennsylvania Ave

Members of the media interested in attending should RSVP to [press@treasury.gov](mailto:press@treasury.gov)

A livestream will be available [here](https://m.youtube.com/c/USTreasGov).

