---
title: "Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen at Discussion with Women Economists in Mexico City, Mexico"
date: 2023-12-06
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1956
press_release_number: JY1956
---

As Prepared for Delivery
It’s a pleasure to see all of you today. Thank you for joining me.
I’m in Mexico City to emphasize the importance of the U.S.-Mexico bilateral relationship and the deep economic integration of our countries.
The United States sees many opportunities for further integration that will fuel private sector growth: from what I’ve called friendshoring—diversifying our supply chains through deepening ties with trusted partners and allies—to the Inflation Reduction Act.
Making the most of these opportunities requires a strong enabling environment for the private sector. It will also be fueled by the full and equal participation of women in the economy.
I know I share many experiences with those of you who have joined me for lunch today. We have all been the only woman in the room or at the decision-making table.
We want to help break down the legal, cultural, and regulatory barriers preventing women from full participation. That is why the United States has been a strong supporter of inclusive programming at the multilateral development banks and works through funds such as the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative—which promotes women’s access to finance, mentoring, and networks and links investments to policy, legal, and regulatory reforms that help create an equal playing field—and through the new gender equality and inclusion policy that was recently approved by the U.S. and Mexico at our bilateral institution, the North American Development Bank.
Today, I am eager to hear about your backgrounds and research, including your thoughts on how we can further bolster the economic partnership between our two countries.
Thank you again for taking time to join me.
###
