---
title: Detailed Press Guidance for Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen’s Travel to Japan
date: 2023-05-05T00:30:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1466
---
WASHINGTON – Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen will depart for Niigata, Japan on May 9 where she will participate in the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting.

While in Japan, Secretary Yellen will work with our closest partners from many of the world’s largest economies to coordinate on action to make the global economy stronger and address shared challenges – including those stemming from Russia’s illegal war in Ukraine.

Secretary Yellen will also coordinate with partners at the G7 to deepen resilient supply chains, including among low- and middle-income countries, through initiatives like “friendshoring” and the G7’s $600 billion mobilization for high-quality infrastructure through the Partnership for Global Infrastructure Investment (PGII). The Secretary will also work with allies on ways to advance collective economic security. Finally, Secretary Yellen will also stand with the G7 as part of the broad global coalition responding to Russia’s illegal war and supporting the brave Ukrainian defense of its sovereignty and right to self-determination. That includes through the G7 coalition price cap – which has supported stable global energy markets and has significantly cut into Russia’s most important source of revenue.

At 2:30PM JST/ 1:30AM EST on Thursday, May 11, Secretary Yellen will hold a press conference in advance of the G7 meetings. During her press conference, Secretary Yellen will highlight her three core priorities for the G7including strengthening the global macroeconomy, redoubling our commitment to Ukraine as it defends itself against Russia’s barbaric war and third, our work to bolster economic resilience and security. The press conference will be open to pre-credentialed press and will be [livestreamed here](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCt2FDbyyFrn_lw1gWwuBfgQ).

In the evening, Secretary Yellen will participate in Session 1 of the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governor Meeting on Russia’s War Against Ukraine & Support for Ukraine. The session is closed press.

Later, the Secretary will attend a working dinner with the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors where they will discuss the global economy. The dinner is closed press.

On Friday, May 12, Secretary Yellen will participate in Sessions 2 and 3 of the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting on Climate Change and Financial Sector Issues.

Later, Secretary Yellen will participate in a G7 family photo, which is open to pre-credentialed media.

At 10:15AM JST, Secretary Yellen will participate in a bilateral meeting with German Finance Minister Christian Linder. There will be a photo spray at the top for pre-approved media.

Later in the afternoon, the Secretary will attend Sessions 1 and 2 of the expanded G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting with partner countries on Tacking Immediate Challenges Facing Developing Countries and Strengthening International Cooperation for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth. The sessions is closed press.

At 2:30PM JST, Secretary Yellen will participate in a family photo with partner countries, which will be open to pre-credentialed media.

On Saturday, May 13 at 8:30AM JST Secretary Yellen participate in a joint session of G7 Finance and Health Ministers. She will then participate in Sessions 4 of the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting on International Taxation. The session is closed press.

At 10:15AM JST, Secretary Yellen will hold a bilateral meeting with Finance Minister of Japan, Shunichi Suzuki. This meeting will have a press spray including brief remarks at the top for pre-approved media.

At 10:45AM JST, Secretary Yellen will participate in Session 5 of the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting on Reflections on the Dialogue with Partner Countries. The session is closed press.

At 2:00PM JST, Secretary Yellen will hold a bilateral meeting with United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer Jeremy Hunt. This meeting will have a press spray including brief remarks at the top for pre-approved media.

Afterwards, Secretary Yellen will travel to Washington, DC.

