---
title: U.S. Department of the Treasury Announces Members of the Commission on Social Impact Partnerships
date: 2023-11-09
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1892
---
WASHINGTON – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced the members of the Commission on Social Impact Partnerships ahead of the next Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) under the Social Impact Partnership to Pay for Results Act (SIPPRA). The Commission is an advisory body that makes recommendations to the Treasury Secretary on the SIPPRA program. The SIPPRA program is a pay-for-results program that supports state and local governments in creating partnerships to invest in programs that are shown to have an impact on people’s lives and bring savings to the government.

The Commission is composed of members who are appointed by the President and Congress. This bipartisan group of members have a wide range of expertise in social policy, finance, and government. The members are the following:

Orin Kramer, Chair

Carol Kellermann

Kimberley Lee

Ryan Martin

Ted McCann

Sara Peters

Dave Wilkinson

Anne Wilson

“I am honored to serve,” said Orin Kramer. “I am confident that the Commission will continue to play a valuable role in implementing the SIPPRA program effectively.”

The Commission is a federal advisory committee under the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA). As such, meetings with the full Commission will be made available to the public. On November 14th, the SIPPRA program is planning to release the FY24 NOFA.

About the Social Impact Partnership to Pay for Results Act (SIPPRA) program

The Social Impact Partnership to Pay for Results Act (SIPPRA) program was signed into law in 2018. The SIPPRA program is a pay-for-performance program that supports state and local governments in implementing social programs that have been shown to be effective and bring savings to the federal, State, or local government. Under SIPPRA, the Treasury Department only pays for programs that achieve predetermined outcomes. The SIPPRA program is designed to help state and local governments to scale up effective social programs, to attract private investment in social services, and to improve the effectiveness of social spending.

###
