---
title: Treasury Imposes Sanctions on More Than 150 Individuals and Entities Supplying Russia’s Military-Industrial Base
date: 2023-12-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1978
---
WASHINGTON — Last week, G7 Leaders reaffirmed their support for an independent, democratic Ukraine within is internationally recognized borders. Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), is implementing the [commitments](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/12/06/g7-leaders-statement-6/) made by G7 Leaders by taking action against third-country actors who materially support Russia’s war; targeting Russian military procurement networks and those who help Russia acquire machine tools, equipment, and key inputs; and further curtailing Russia’s use of the international financial system to further its war in Ukraine.

“The Kremlin has steadily turned Russia into a wartime economy, but Putin’s war machine cannot survive on domestic production alone,” said Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen. “Our sanctions today continue to tighten the vise on willing third-country suppliers and networks providing Russia the inputs it desperately needs to ramp up and sustain its military-industrial base.”

Concurrently, the Department of State is [imposing sanctions on over 100 entities and individuals](https://www.state.gov/taking-additional-sweeping-measures-against-russia-3/), including those engaged in sanctions evasion in numerous third countries, complicit in furthering Russia’s ability to wage its war against Ukraine, and responsible for bolstering Russia’s future energy production and export capacity.

## THIRD-COUNTRY SUPPLIERS AND PROCUREMENT NETWORKS

Treasury continues to take action to identify and disrupt third-country individuals, entities, and networks that facilitate, arrange, and enable the transfer of key technology, equipment, and inputs to Russian military-industrial base end-users. Many of these items have been identified by the Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security, alongside the European Union, Japan, and the United Kingdom, as “[common high priority items](https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/all-articles/13-policy-guidance/country-guidance/2172-russia-export-controls-list-of-common-high-priority-items)” because Russia seeks to procure them for its weapons programs.

Today’s action once again underscores Russia’s utilization of Türkiye, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), and the People’s Republic of China (PRC), as well as the use of complex transnational networks and third-country cut-outs, to acquire much-needed technology and equipment for its war economy.

### Multinational Weapons and Technology Procurement Network

OFAC is designating a network of four entities and nine individuals based in the PRC, the Russian Federation, Hong Kong, and Pakistan involved in the facilitation and procurement of Chinese-manufactured weapons and technologies to Russia. Chinese national **Hu Xiaoxun**(Hu) has utilized his PRC-based private defense company** Jarvis HK Co., Ltd.**(Jarvis) and a network of associates to coordinate the sale of Chinese-manufactured weapons and technologies to Russia.

Hu’s network has worked to structure deals circumventing United States sanctions and Chinese controls on the export of military-related materials, including for conventional weapons and electronic components with Russian customers ranging from thousands of dollars for ammunition, to hundreds of thousands of dollars for loitering munitions, to millions of dollars for semiconductor microchip manufacturing equipment. Hu and his associates have attempted to mask the identities of his customers by obfuscating the end-user of PRC-manufactured products, including by coordinating shipments through third-party countries and organizing shipments through intermediary company **PJSC Vysochaishy**(Vysochaishy) and its Chairman** Sergey Vladimirovich Dokuchaev**(Dokuchaev).

Hu’s network has facilitated the procurement of Chinese-manufactured military materials and technology, including UAVs and related components, for various Russian customers and intermediaries, including **Technology 5 Co., Limited**(Technology 5) and its General Director** Vladimir Vladimirovich Gugnin**(Gugnin),** Limited Liability Company Yuna Engineering**(Yuna) and its General Director** Andrei Denisovich Zalevskii**(Zalevskii),** Roman Aleksandrovich Kotekin**(Kotekin) of U.S.-designated FGUP NPP Istok, and Russian intermediary** Boris Olegovich Bernikov**(Bernikov).

Hu has worked with Pakistani associates and weapons dealers **Syed Asadullah**(Asadullah) and** Nur Khabib Shakh**(Shakh), as well as Russian associate** Vladimir Krylov**(Krylov), to coordinate sale and business proposals, structure plans for Russian domestic production of military goods, and procure various Chinese weapons and technologies on behalf of the Russian military and defense sector.

Hu was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the defense and related materiel sector of the Russian Federation economy.

Jarvis was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for being owned or controlled by, or having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Hu.

Technology 5 was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for having materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services to or in support of, Hu.

Gugnin was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Technology 5.

Yuna was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the technology sector of the Russian Federation economy.

Zalevskii was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Yuna.

Kotekin, Bernikov, Vysochaishy, and Krylov were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the defense and related materiel sector of the Russian Federation economy.

Dokuchaev was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Vysochaishy.

Asadullah and Shakh were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for having materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services to or in support of, Hu.

### Türkiye-based Entities

**Bosfor Avrasya Ic Ve Dis Ticaret Limited Sirketi**(Bosfor Avrasya) has sent hundreds of shipments of common high priority items to Russia-based manufacturers, including shipments of ball or roller bearings.** Egetir Otomotiv Sanayi Ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi**(Egetir Otomotiv) has sent over 150 shipments to Russia-based manufacturers, with the majority of the shipments including common high priority items such as ball or roller bearings.** Globus Turkey Lojistik Dis Ticaret Limited Sirketi**(Globus Turkey) has sent common high priority items to Russia-based end-users, including tantalum capacitors.** Kartal Exim Dis Ticaret Limited Sirketi**(Kartal Exim) supplies technological equipment from Europe, Asia, the United States, and Canada. Kartal Exim has sent dozens of shipments of common high priority items to Russia-based end-users, including electronic integrated circuits and machines for the reception, conversion, and transmission of data.** Konomar Gemi Elektrik Ve Elektronik Limited Sirketi**(Konomar Gemi) is involved in the sale and servicing of navigation and communication systems. Konomar Gemi has sent common high priority items to Russia-based end-users, including a radio navigational aid apparatus.** Megasan Elektronik Ticaret Ve Sanayi Anonim Sirketi**(Megasan Elektronik) offers a number of discrete semiconductor products, including diodes and transistors. In February 2023, Megasan Elektronik sent dozens of shipments of common high priority items to Russia-based end-users, including electronic integrated circuits; machines for the reception, conversion, and transmission of data; and tantalum capacitors.** Ozkaya Otomotiv Mamulleri Pazarlama Sanayi Ve Ticaret Anonim Sirketi**(Ozkaya Otomotiv) has sent common high priority items to Russia-based manufacturers, including dozens of shipments of ball or roller bearings.

Bosfor Avrasya, Egetir Otomotiv, and Ozkaya Otomotiv were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the manufacturing sector of the Russian Federation economy.

Globus Turkey, Kartal Exim, and Konomar Gemi were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the technology sector of the Russian Federation economy.

Megasan Elektronik was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the electronics sector of the Russian Federation economy.

### UAE-based Entities

**AMC Service FZE** has shipped aircraft parts, components, and materials to Russia.** Aspect DWC LLC** is a helicopter services company that shipped aircraft spare parts and equipment to Russia.**A T S Heavy Equipment and Machinery Spare Parts Trading** has delivered millions of dollars’ worth of aircraft parts to Russia.** Futuris FZE**(Futuris) has shipped technologies to Russia including fuses, metal cutting equipment, and electrical equipment. U.S.-sanctioned [Limited Liability Company AK Microtech](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1636)(AK Microtech) used Futuris to circumvent sanctions and purchase microelectronics production equipment on its behalf.** Griffon FZC** has shipped millions of dollars’ worth of aircraft spare parts and equipment to Russia.** RDS Cargo Group DWC LLC** has shipped common high priority items to Russia, including electronic integrated circuits and machines for the reception, conversion, and transmission of data.** Reliable Freight Services FZCO** has shipped items such as x-ray systems, batteries, and aircraft parts and components to Russia.** Skyparts FZCO** has shipped aircraft parts and components as well as common high priority items to Russia, including radio navigational aid apparatuses and machines for the reception, conversion, and transmission of data.

AMC Service FZE, Aspect DWC LLC, A T S Heavy Equipment and Machinery Spare Parts Trading, Griffon FZC, and Skyparts FZCO were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the aerospace sector of the Russian Federation economy.

Futuris FZE, RDS Cargo Group DWC LLC, and Reliable Freight Services FZCO were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the technology sector of the Russian Federation economy.

### PRC-based Entities

**Beijing Yunze Technology Co., Ltd.** and** Chang Guang Satellite Technology Co., Ltd.** are PRC-based commercial satellite imagery companies that provided high-resolution observation satellite imagery to U.S.-designated [Private Military Company ‘Wagner’](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1220)(PMC Wagner). The Russian military and associated entities are increasingly reliant on PRC commercial satellite imagery to support their continued invasion of Ukraine. PRC agent company Beijing Yunze provided Russian companies with access to Chang Guang’s remote sensing satellites to support imagery of “conflict zones.” Specifically, satellite imagery from Chang Guang's satellites were used to support Russian operations in Ukraine. Additionally, Beijing Yunze was paid by another U.S.-designated Russian space company, [Joint Stock Company Terra Tech](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1220)(Terra Tech). Terra Tech is a Russia-based technology firm that supplies space imagery acquired by commercially active satellites, as well as aerial images acquired by unmanned systems. Terra Tech provided synthetic aperture radar satellite imagery orders over locations in Ukraine. These images were gathered in order to enable PMC Wagner combat operations in Ukraine.** IMAXChip Technology Co., Limited**(IMAXChip) has made multiple shipments of advanced electronics to Russia. U.S.-designated [Limited Liability Company Akrol](https://www.state.gov/united-states-imposes-additional-sanctions-and-export-controls-on-russia/) has used IMAXChip to procure electronic components.** Izzition E-Technology Co., Ltd**. and** Waytop Industrial Ltd.** have been used by the Russian government to procure electronic components.

Hong Kong-based **Kobi International Company**(Kobi) has facilitated thousands of

shipments into Russia, many of which were composed of sensitive electronic parts to U.S.-designated persons involved in Russia’s military or defense sector. Kobi has circumvented export rules and restrictions in order to obtain electronic parts on behalf of Russian procurement agents.

**SINO Machinery Co., Ltd.** has shipped technological equipment and machine tools to Russia, including remote controls and metal-working machines.

Beijing Yunze Technology Co., Ltd. and Chang Guang Satellite Technology CO., LTD., were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for having materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods in services to or in support of PMC Wagner, a person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to E.O. 14024.

IMAXChip, Izzition E-Technology Co., Ltd., and Waytop Industrial Ltd. were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the electronics sector of the Russian Federation economy.

Kobi was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the defense and related materiel sector of the Russian Federation economy.

SINO Machinery CO., Ltd. was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the technology sector of the Russian Federation economy.

### Dongjin Lee

South Korea national **Dongjin Lee**(Lee) is a key procurement agent for U.S.-designated AK Microtech. AK Microtech, [which was designated in July 2023](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1636), is a Russia-based firm that specializes in transferring foreign semiconductor technology to Russian microelectronics production companies, including entities that provide microelectronics to the Russian defense industry. Lee has directed a system of front companies and complex payment networks to acquire equipment and technology for AK Microtech, including technology critical for semiconductor production, from South Korean, Japanese, and U.S. manufacturers.

Lee was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the technology sector of the Russian Federation economy and for having materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for AK Microtech, a person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to E.O. 14024.

### Switzerland-based Electronics Exporter

Switzerland-based **Thamestone SA**(Thamestone) is a provider of a wide range of electronic products, including electrical connectors, circuits, and resistors. Thamestone sent common high priority items such as integrated circuits and multilayer ceramic capacitors to Russia. Additionally, Thamestone sent hundreds of shipments to Russia-based** Streloi Ekommerts**, a wholesaler of electronic equipment and parts.

Thamestone and Streloi Ekommerts were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the electronics sector of the Russian Federation economy.

### Singapore-based Electronics Supplier

Singapore-based **Micro Electronics Technologies PTE LTD**(Micro Electronics Technologies) is an independent electronics design house and offers its clients electronic manufacturing services. Micro Electronics Technologies sent common high priority items such as integrated circuits and multilayer ceramic capacitors to Russia. Additionally, Micro Electronics Technologies sent hundreds of shipments to Russia-based** Onshor Vind**, a wholesaler of electronic equipment and parts.

As of 2022, Micro Electronics Technologies was 10 percent owned by Russian national **Dmitrii Aleksandrovich Veleslavov**(Veleslavov), the Director General of Russia-based** Macro EMS LTD**(Macro EMS), a manufacturer of computers and communication equipment and provider of high-quality electronics original design manufacturing services.

Micro Electronics Technologies and Onshor Vind were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the electronics sector of the Russian Federation economy. Veleslavov and Macro EMS were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the technology sector of the Russian Federation economy.

### Kyrgyz Republic-based Technology Shipper

Kyrgyz Republic-based **Weitmann Handeln Allianz LLC**(Weitmann) is a provider of turnkey supply, logistics, and customs clearances services to foreign clients. Weitmann sent hundreds of shipments to Russia consisting of automatic data processing machines and disk storage devices.

Weitmann was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the technology sector of the Russian Federation economy.

### Maldives- and Tajikistan-based Aerospace Suppliers

Maldives-based **Intermodal Maldives** has shipped aviation spare parts, machine components, and cellulosic fibers to Russian companies.

Tajikistan-based **Chamaiyati Doroi Masauliyati Makhdudi Kafolati Komil**(Kafolati Komil) sent foreign-made aviation parts to Russia via the UAE.

Intermodal Maldives and Kafolati Komil were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the aerospace sector of the Russian Federation economy.

## RUSSIA’S MILITARY-INDUSTRIAL BASE

OFAC is also continuing to target Russia-based entities involved in the importation, production, modification, and sale of defense-related and industrial technology, UAVs, machinery, parts, inputs, and components.

**Joint Stock Company Izhevsk Electromechanical Plant Kupol**(AO IEMZ Kupol) is Russia’s leader in the production of anti-aircraft defense equipment used by the Russian Ministry of Defense and is contracted to supply the Tor-M2 anti-aircraft missile system to Russian forces. Additionally, AO IEMZ Kupol is a primary contractor involved in an effort of its parent company Joint Stock Company Aerospace Defense Concern Almaz-Antey (Almaz-Antey) to develop and manufacture one-way attack UAVs for the Russian Ministry of Defense. Almaz-Antey was designated pursuant to E.O. 13661 on [July 16, 2014](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jl2572) and pursuant to E.O. 14024 on [January 26, 2023](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1220).** Obshchestvo S Ogranichennoi Otvetstvennostyu Plaz**(Plaz) subcontracts to AO IEMZ Kupol in the development and production effort of the Russian-developed one-way attack UAVs. Plaz is responsible for the avionics, navigation system, and other components of the UAV. Plaz also produces the Grifon (variant Gryphon) series reconnaissance drone that is used by units within the Russian military.** Obshchestvo S Ogranichennoi Otvetstvennostyu NPK Aerokon**(Aerokon) develops and produces the airframe as a sub-contractor to AO IEMZ Kupol in its effort to develop and produce Russian one-way attack UAVs.** Laggar Pro OOO**(Laggar Pro) produces a UAV mobile launch vehicle as a sub-contractor to AO IEMZ Kupol in the development and production effort of the Russian-developed one-way attack UAVs.** TSK Vektor OOO**(TSK Vektor) assists with procurement on behalf of AO IEMZ Kupol and Almaz-Antey in the development and production effort of the one-way attack UAVs.

AO IEMZ Kupol and Plaz were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the defense and related materiel sector of the Russian Federation economy.

Aerokon, Laggar Pro and TSK Vektor were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for having materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods in services to or in support of AO IEMZ Kupol.

The following Russia-based entities were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the defense and related materiel sector of the Russian Federation economy:

- **Joint Stock Company 75 Arsenal** specializes in the overhaul of air defense systems and complexes, radar stations, and ground-based radio interrogators.
- **AO Eirburg** is involved in the development, production, supply, and testing of components used in the Forpost-R UAV, which is a combat UAV utilized by the Russian Ministry of Defense, including in Ukraine.
- **Federal State Enterprise Kamenksy Combine** manufactures weapons, ammunition, and ordnance.
- **Spetsialnoe Konstruktorsko Tekhnologicheskoe Byuro Plastik**(Plastik) develops and manufactures products, including for the Russian military. Plastik also developed and manufactured a structure for a Russia Ministry of Defense imagery satellite.
- **Joint Stock Company Polimer** specializes in the production of ammunition and explosives for Russia’s Armed Forces.
- **Joint Stock Company Strommashina Shield** manufactures military fighting vehicles.

The following Russia-based entities were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the manufacturing sector of the Russian Federation economy:

- **Joint Stock Company Aerospace Systems Design Bureau** designs and manufactures onboard systems and components, including onboard cable networks for aircraft in Russia.
- **Limited Liability Company Agrisovgaz** is involved in the manufacture of metal structures, pipes, steel, and aluminum.
- **Akkumulyatornye Tekhnologii** manufactures batteries used by Russian car manufacturers and Russia’s Ministry of Defense.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Akkumulyatornyi Zavod Im NM Ignatyeva Akom** manufactures car and truck batteries.
- **Zakrytoe Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Mnogoprofilnaya Proizvodstvennaya Kommercheskaya Firma Alkor** produces rechargeable batteries.
- **Federal State Enterprise Anozit** is involved in the manufacture of chemicals and plastics.
- **Atomspetsproject Joint Stock Company** manufactures instruments and apparatus for measuring electrical quantities.
- **Limited Liability Company Avisto** is involved in the manufacture of machinery and explosives.
- **Public Joint Stock Company Chelyabinskiy Mashinostroitelnyy Zavod Avtomobilnykh Pritsepov Uralavtopritsep** manufactures motor vehicles, trailers, and semi-trailers.
- **Limited Liability Company Bitvan** manufactures high-tech computer-numerically controlled (CNC) machine tools.
- **Joint Stock Company Bryansk Chemical Plant of the 50th Anniversary of the USSR** manufactures industrial explosives and charges.
- **Limited Liability Company DM Technologies** supplies metalworking technology and industrial equipment and is involved in the wholesale of machine tools.
- **Open Joint Stock Company Dolta** is involved in the manufacture of electronic components and communication equipment.
- **Joint Stock Company Dubna Cable Plant** manufactures wires and cables for electronic equipment.
- **Dubna Switching Equipment Plant** manufactures wiring devices and electronic components.
- **Ekos1 Joint Stock Company** manufactures chemical reagents and high purity chemicals.
- **AO Elektroistochnik** is involved in the production of special batteries for the Russian Air Force and Navy.
- **Joint Stock Company Energiya** develops and produces autonomous power supply sources for missile and artillery systems and for the Russian Navy.
- **Engelsskoe Priborostroitelnoe Obyedinenie Signal** manufactures instruments and gas products for general industrial use.
- **Limited Liability Company Engineering Firm AB Universal** manufactures non-standard industrial equipment, including CNC milling machines and additive manufacturing equipment. The company supplies technical equipment to Russian industrial enterprises and research centers.
- **Open Joint Stock Company EBC Management Company** is the management company for Eurasian Bearing Company (EPK), Russia’s largest manufacturer of bearings.
- **AO EPK** produces and sells bearings and components.
- **TD EPK** sells all types of bearings and components produced by EPK.
- **OOO EPK Kuznitsa** is a metal manufacturing company that is involved in the manufacture of wooden containers and steel casting.
- **OOO EPK Novye Tekhnologii** manufactures ball and roller bearings.
- **OAO EPK Saratov** is involved in the production of bearings for automotive technology, railway equipment, and shipbuilding.
- **OAO EPK Samara** produces bearings and products used in the shipbuilding, machine tool, and automotive industries.
- **OAO EPK Volzhsky** produces roller bearings for the automotive, metallurgy, machine tool, and rail transport industries.
- **Fotoniks Klaud** manufactures optical tables and optomechanics elements and offers a wide selection of foreign laboratory equipment.
- **Obshchestvo S Ogranichennoi Otvetstvennostyu Gas** manufactures armored cars.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Gidroagregat** manufactures aviation equipment such as actuators, cylinders, steering units, hydraulic pumps, and air propellers.
- **Joint Stock Company Kamenskvolokno** manufactures chemical fibers used in the defense industry.
- **Obshchestvo S Ogranichennoi Otvetstvennostyu Korporatsiya Aipi** manufactures accumulators, including for vehicles, batteries, and their components.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Irkutskkabel** manufactures current carrying wires.
- **Kurskii Akkumulyatornyi Zavod** produces starter batteries for car production plants in Russia.
- **Nauchno-Proizvodstvennoe Predpriyatie Istochnik** develops and produces batteries and accumulators.
- **Labsaintifik** installs industrial machinery and equipment and is involved in the wholesale of machinery, machine tools, and industrial equipment.
- **Lithium  Element Joint Stock Company** develops and manufactures chemical current sources and batteries.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Marposadkabel** manufactures wires and other cables for electronics and electrical equipment.
- **OOO Monitoring** manufactures and supplies pure gases and gas mixtures, measuring systems and measuring instruments, and gas mixture vapor sources.
- **Mytishchi Instrument Engineering Plant** designs and manufactures special-purpose vehicles for use in extreme conditions, including by the Russian Ministry of Defense.
- **Nauchno Issledovatelski Institut Khimicheskikh Istochnikov Toka Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo** manufactures alkaline nickel-cadmium batteries.
- **Limited Liability Company Invent** is involved in the manufacture and wholesale of metal-working equipment and machine tools.
- **Limited Liability Company Northwestern Bearing Company** is a manufacturer of ball bearings.
- **Joint Stock Company Krasnoznamensk Semiconductors Factory Arsenal** manufactures electronic components, including diodes, transistors, and other semi-conductor devices.
- **Manometr Limited Liability Company** manufactures devices for the management and control of heat power processes.
- **Limited Liability Company Metallmash** is a supplier of metalworking equipment and is involved in the manufacture of tools.
- **Limited Liability Company Metalmaster** supplies foreign-made metalworking equipment and machine tools and is involved in the installation of industrial machinery.
- **Joint Stock Company Novosibirsk Instrument Making Plant** is one of Russia’s leading manufacturers of precision daylight, night vision optics, and thermal imaging for the Russian military and the Federal Security Service (the FSB).
- **Limited Liability Company Penza Bearing Plant** is involved in the production and sale of various types of bearings.
- **Podolskkabel** manufactures wires and cables.
- **Joint Stock Company Polyot Research and Production Company** manufactures aviation radio communications for fighter jets.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Promyshlennye Tekhnologii** manufactures components for aviation, land, and marine equipment, including electronic components and other materials for use by the Russian Navy.
- **Joint Stock Company Promtech Ulyanovsk** manufactures onboard cable networks for aircraft.
- **Joint Stock Company Promtekh Irkutsk** manufactures electronic components, including radar equipment, radio navigational devices, diodes, transistors, and other semi-conductor devices.
- **Joint Stock Company Promtekh Kazan** manufactures diodes, transistors, radar equipment, and radio navigational devices.
- **Joint Stock Company RIF** builds ships and floating structures.
- **Open Joint Stock Company Rikor Electronics** is involved in the production of automotive components and electronic products.
- **Limited Liability Company Scientific Research Institute for Precision Mechanics** creates and modernizes control systems and specialized sensor equipment.
- **Obshchestvo S Ogranichennoi Otvetstvennostyu Sellz Treid** manufactures lithium batteries.
- **Sibelectroprivod LLC** manufactures electrical traction motors.
- **Sigma Tekh** manufactures measuring and navigational instruments and is involved in the wholesale of machinery and equipment.
- **Signal Teplotekhnika OOO** is a manufacturer of gas heating equipment.
- **Limited Liability Company Srednevolzhsky Bearing Plant** manufactures large-sized bearings.
- **Obshchestvo S Ogranichennoi Otvetstvennostyu Stirer** supplies metalworking equipment, metal-cutting tools, and industrial machinery.
- **Limited Liability Company Experimental Design Bureau Tekhnika** manufactures trailers, semi-trailers, and specialty motor vehicle bodies.
- **Limited Liability Company Tenron** is a wholesaler of manufacturing electrical equipment, machinery, and materials.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Firma Tvema** manufactures track equipment and devices for railroad, tram, and other tracks.
- **Joint Stock Company Tyumen Battery Factory** produces automotive batteries, traction batteries, diesel batteries, and batteries for heavy tracked vehicles.
- **Umac LLC** is a supplier of various types of CNC metalworking equipment in the Russian market and is involved in the manufacture of metalworking equipment and machine tools. The company has imported European-origin machine tools linked to the production of tank shells.
- **Limited Liability Company Volgogradpromproekt** produces ferrocene-containing combustion catalysts and technology for the production of chemicals.
- **Closed Joint Stock Company Vologda Bearing Plant** is one of the largest producers of ball and roller bearings in Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Volsk Mechanical Plant** manufactures combat vehicles used to deploy anti-tank missile systems.
- **Joint Stock Company Zavod Chuvashkabel** manufactures wires and cables.
- **Joint Stock Company Zavod Korpusov** manufactures light-armored wheel-mounted military equipment and industrial machinery.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Zavod Selmash** manufactures instruments and appliances.
- **Joint Stock Company Karachev Plant Electrodetal** manufactures wiring devices and electronic equipment for vehicles.
- **Joint Stock Company Yaroslavl Radioworks** manufactures communication equipment.

The following Russia-based entities were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the technology sector of the Russian Federation economy:

- **Limited Liability Company Automization and Communication Service** offers maintenance services for automation systems and equipment.
- **Joint Stock Company Scientific and Technical Company Azimut Photonics** is a distributor of optoelectronics and photonics.
- **Joint Stock Company Digital Manufactory** is a software developer specializing in the development of computer-aided design (CAD) systems for onboard cable networks and pipeline systems for aircraft, vessels, and ground equipment. The software is used by Russia’s military-industrial base, including by companies in the aircraft and shipbuilding industries.
- **Autonomous Nonprofit Organization Institute of Marine Instrumentation and Robotics** engages in research and development of marine robotics and is a manufacturer of electronic components and electronic printed circuits.
- **Limited Liability Company Nissa Digispace** supplies 3D printers, 3D scanners, and associated software, supporting Russia’s additive manufacturing industry.
- **Picaso 3D LLC** manufactures 3D printers and develops associated software, supporting Russia’s additive manufacturing industry.
- **Limited Liability Company Tsvetnoy Mir** supplies 3D equipment in Russia, including industrial 3D printers and 3D scanners. The company has supplied equipment to Russian government customers.

The following Russia-based entities were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the aerospace sector of the Russian Federation economy:

- **Limited Liability Company Aviateksim** specializes in the repair, maintenance, and modification of aviation equipment.
- **Limited Liability Company Uralhelicom** purchases helicopters from Europe and the United States and operates them in Russia.

The following Russia-based entities were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the transportation sector of the Russian Federation economy:

- **Aircraft Components Logistics Ltd** is a logistics company that offers international delivery services and is involved in the wholesale of aircraft parts.
- **AO Cargo Service Center** offers services including the transportation and delivery of what they characterize as “sanctioned goods” from Europe and the United States to Russia.
- **Elfor TL** provides services for domestic Russian transportation by any type of transport, international cargo transportation, and customs clearance.
- **ITB Logistika** is a logistics company that offers services including the import of what they characterize as “sanctioned goods” into Russia.
- **Motorinvest** is involved in the manufacture of motor vehicles and electrical and electronic equipment for motor vehicles.
- **OOO Realeksport** is an export and foreign trade services company that offers services including the import of what they characterize as “sanctioned goods” into Russia.
- **Sibavtoresurs** is involved in the maintenance and repair of motor vehicles.
- **OOO Smartlogister** is a transportation company that offers to help customers purchase and deliver what they characterize as “sanctioned goods” from abroad.

The following Russia-based entities were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the electronics sector of the Russian Federation economy:

- **Elpa Research Institute and Pilot Line Joint Stock Company** manufactures piezoceramic materials and acousto-electronics products.
- **Limited Liability Company Gaan Corporation** is involved in the supply of electronic components.
- **Mordovia Radio Electronic Company** manufactures electronic components, electronic printed circuits, and communications equipment.
- **Limited Liability Company Prius Electronics** engages in the wholesale of electronic and telecommunications equipment and parts.
- **Promtechcomplekt JSC** engages in the wholesale of electronic equipment and parts.
- **Limited Liability Company Promtekhpostavka** engages in the wholesale of electronic equipment and parts, as well as the wholesale of manufacturing electrical equipment.
- **Joint Stock Company Promtech Dubna** manufactures aviation wires, electrical connectors, and on-board network cables for Russia’s aviation industry.
- **Joint Stock Company Promtech Service** provides aircraft construction companies in Russia with technology to repair onboard electrical equipment.
- **RIF Corporation** produces integrated electronic circuits and microelectronics.
- **S&D Solutions Limited Liability Company** manufactures electronic components.** Publichnoe Aktsionernoe Obschestvo City**(PAO City) is involved in construction activities and has represented the Government of Moscow for 20 years on issues involving the creation, development, and management of the Moscow International Business Center (MIBC). The MIBC is one of the largest business centers in the world and it is home to seven of Europe's ten-highest skyscrapers. PAO City was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the construction sector of the Russian Federation economy.** Limited Liability Company Spectrum**(Spectrum) is involved in the wholesale of metals and metal ores. Spectrum was designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the metals and mining sector of the Russian Federation economy.

## ADDITIONAL RUSSIAN FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

OFAC also continues to target financial institutions located in Russia to limit Russia’s connections with the international financial system. The following Russia-based entities were designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the financial services sector of the Russian Federation economy:

- **Expobank Joint Stock Company** is a Russia-based commercial bank.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Obedinennaya Investitsionnaya Gruppa** is a Russia-based investment company.
- **Settlement Non Bank Credit Organization Metallurg** is a Russia-based commercial bank.
- **Obshchestvo s Ogranichennoi Otvetstvennostyu Signal Invest** is a Russia-based financial institution.

## SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the persons above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. All transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or blocked persons are prohibited unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt. These prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any blocked person and the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the SDN List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to [OFAC’s Frequently Asked Question 897 here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/897). For detailed information on the process to [submit a request for removal from an OFAC sanctions list, please click here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[For identifying information on the individuals and entities sanctioned today, click here.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20231212)

