---
title: "Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen Ahead at Lunch with Women Economists and Entrepreneurs in Hanoi, Vietnam"
date: 2023-07-20
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1631
press_release_number: JY1631
---

As Prepared for Delivery
It’s great to see all of you. Thank you for joining me for lunch.
I am in Hanoi to emphasize the importance the United States places on strengthening our economic partnership with Vietnam.
Since the start of our official ties in 1995, the U.S.-Vietnam relationship has broadened and deepened.
Bilateral trade has grown tremendously over the past three decades, reaching a high of $138 billion in goods trade last year, a remarkable achievement in just 28 years.
We are encouraged by the growing investments that companies are making in Vietnam, from those in the semiconductor ecosystem to the clean energy supply chain, which are creating new opportunities for Vietnamese workers and businesses.
Of course, the strength of our relationship is rooted in strong people-to-people ties.
We have worked closely to address the legacies of the war.
There are more than two million Vietnamese-Americans and over 30,000 Vietnamese students are studying in the United States—the fifth-largest group of foreign students in the United States.
Our two peoples share many things in common. And personally, as an economist, I know I share many similar experiences as those of you who have joined me for lunch today. For example, I know what it’s like when you’re the only woman in the room or at the decision-making table.
I am eager to hear about your backgrounds and research, including about your careers and your thoughts on how we can further bolster the partnership between our two countries.
Thank you again for taking time to join me, and I look forward to our lunch.
###
