---
title: Detailed Guidance and Press Schedule for U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen in India for G20 Meetings
date: 2023-02-17
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1282
---
WASHINGTON — Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen will travel to Bengaluru, India to participate in the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Ministerial. In these engagements, Secretary Yellen will join with allies in holding Russia accountable for its illegal invasion of Ukraine, and partner with countries to mitigate the spillover effects of the war. Secretary Yellen will also engage with partners to address challenges and build a stronger, more resilient, global economy.

On February 23 in the afternoon, Secretary Yellen will hold a press conference. There, the Secretary will discuss resilience of the U.S. and global economy in the face of headwinds including Russia's illegal invasion of Ukraine and highlight key priorities for Treasury during the G20. This event will be open to pre-credentialed press and will be [livestreamed here](https://lnks.gd/l/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.eyJidWxsZXRpbl9saW5rX2lkIjoxMDAsInVyaSI6ImJwMjpjbGljayIsImJ1bGxldGluX2lkIjoiMjAyMzAyMTcuNzE3MzgyMDEiLCJ1cmwiOiJodHRwczovL3d3dy55b3V0dWJlLmNvbS9jaGFubmVsL1VDdDJGRGJ5eUZybl9sdzFnV3d1QmZnUSJ9.iBeddbiKH-ksoz47Q0TN509i64JHyZjyU_HybBzDDkw/s/1173460507/br/154671633040-l).

On February 24, 10:00AM IST, Secretary Yellen will participate in Sessions I and II of the G20 Finance Ministers meeting on “International Financial Architecture, Sustainable Finance and Infrastructure,” as well as on “Financial Sector and Financial Inclusion.” These sessions will be closed press.

On February 25, 9:00AM IST, Secretary Yellen will also convene a roundtable with U.S. and Indian executives in the tech sector to discuss deepening U.S.-Indian economic ties as well advancing shared goals like bolstering digital public infrastructure. There will be a press spray with brief remarks at the beginning of this meeting for pre-credentialed media.

On February 25, 2:30PM IST, Secretary Yellen will participate in the third G20 session on “Global Economics, Health and International Tax.” This session will be closed press.

While in India, Secretary Yellen will participate in other events and bilateral meetings, including with Indian Minister of Finance and Minister of Corporate Affairs Nirmala Sitharaman and United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer Jeremy Hunt.

Further engagements and details will be announced.

