---
title: Treasury Targets Individuals and Entity Supporting the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s Weapons of Mass Destruction Program
date: 2023-08-31
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1710
---
*Action Taken in Coordination with the Republic of Korea and Japan*

WASHINGTON — In coordination with the Republic of Korea and Japan, the United States sanctioned two individuals and one entity—**Jon Jin Yong**,** Sergey Mikhaylovich Kozlov**, and** Intellekt LLC—** involved in generating revenue for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s (DPRK) unlawful development of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and ballistic missiles. Today’s action by the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is being taken in response to the DPRK’s August 23 attempted launch of a reconnaissance satellite into orbit, marking its second failed attempt to do so in three months.

“In furtherance of the Administration’s commitment to coordinate our responses to regional challenges, today’s action—along with the actions of our allies and partners—targets the facilitation networks that enable the DPRK’s ballistic missile and WMD programs, in violation of UN Security Council resolutions,” said Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Brian E. Nelson. “The United States will continue to coordinate closely with the Republic of Korea and Japan in our collective effort to combat the DPRK’s unlawful and destructive activities.”

Today’s action targets two individuals who have directly supported or helped generate revenue for DPRK organizations that are linked to the development of WMD, and identifies a company owned by one of the individuals.

### DPRK WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION SUPPORT

Russia-based**Jon Jin Yong** worked with**Sergey Mikhaylovich Kozlov**(** Kozlov**) to coordinate the use of DPRK construction workers in Russia and served as a director of one of Kozlov’s companies. Kozlov has assisted Jon Jin Yong in the procurement of items commonly used in the ship-building industry. Jon Jin Yong led a team of DPRK information technology (IT) workers in Russia and worked with Russian nationals to obtain identification documents to validate the DPRK IT team’s accounts on freelance IT work platforms. Some of the identity documents were from family members or Russian employees of Kozlov. OFAC is designating Jon Jin Yong** ** pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13687 (“Imposing Additional Sanctions With Respect to North Korea”) for being an official of the Workers’ Party of Korea, which was sanctioned on March 15, 2016, pursuant to E.O. 13722 (“Blocking Property of the Government of North Korea and the Workers’ Party of Korea, and Prohibiting Certain Transactions With Respect to North Korea”). OFAC is designating** ** Kozlov pursuant to E.O. 13687 for materially assisting, sponsoring, or providing financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services to or in support of, Jon Jin Yong.

Jon Jin Yong coordinated a Moscow-based construction project between**Intellekt LLC** and a Second Academy of Natural Sciences (SANS) cover company. On August 30, 2010, the U.S. Department of State designated SANS pursuant to E.O. 13382 (“Blocking Property of Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferators and Their Supporters”) for having engaged, or attempted to engage, in activities or transactions that have materially contributed to the proliferation of WMD or their means of delivery. Today’s action will further restrict the ability of SANS to utilize its foreign-based agents to procure both financial and material support from DPRK representatives in foreign countries and from companies that provide services to circumvent U.S. and UN sanctions.  OFAC is designating Intellekt LLC pursuant to E.O. 13687 for being owned or controlled by Kozlov.

### SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, pursuant to E.O. 13687, all property and interests in property of the persons named above that are in the United States, or in the possession or control of U.S. persons, are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked.

Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or otherwise exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons. The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any blocked person or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

In addition, persons that engage in certain transactions with the individuals or entities designated today may themselves be exposed to designation.  Furthermore, any foreign financial institution that knowingly facilitates a significant transaction or provides significant financial services for any of the individuals or entities designated today could be subject to U.S. correspondent or payable-through account sanctions.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from its ability to designate and add persons to the SDN List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law.  The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior.  For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to OFAC’s[Frequently Asked Question 897](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/897).

For detailed information on the process to submit a request for[removal from an OFAC sanctions list, please click here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[Find identifying information on the individuals sanctioned today here.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20230831)

###
