---
title: Treasury Expands Burma-Related Sanctions and Designates Additional Jet Fuel Suppliers in Burma
date: 2023-08-23
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy1701
---
WASHINGTON — Today, taking note of the Burmese military regime’s violent airstrikes against the people of Burma, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) issued a determination that allows sanctions to be imposed on any foreign individual or entity that operates in the jet fuel sector of the Burmese economy. Concurrently, OFAC designated two individuals and one entity that are involved in the procurement and distribution of jet fuel to Burma’s military regime, and two entities for being owned or controlled by such persons.

After overthrowing Burma’s democratically elected civilian government in a coup on February1, 2021, the military regime has increasingly relied on violent airstrikes to repress the people of Burma. Most recently, fighter jet and helicopter attacks killed up to 10 civilians near Nyaung Kone village and up to 80 civilians, including women and schoolchildren, in a village in the Sagaing region of central Burma in April and June 2023, respectively. The Sagaing region attack was one many deadly air strikes since the military seized control of the country. Since the coup, over 3,900 civilians are estimated to have been killed by the regime.

“By expanding the use of our sanctions authority to target an additional sector critical to the military regime, we are able to further deprive the regime of the resources that enable it to oppress its citizens,” said Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Brian E. Nelson. “The United States remains committed to supporting the people of Burma in their pursuit of freedom and democracy.”

### EXPANDING SANCTIONS: JET FUEL SECTOR

Today, OFAC is strengthening and expanding its use of Burma-related sanctions authorities by issuing a determination that identifies the jet fuel sector of the Burmese economy pursuant to section 1(a)(i) of Executive Order (E.O.) 14014. This determination allows for sanctions to be imposed on any foreign individual or entity determined to operate in the jet fuel sector of the Burmese economy. This action complements existing provisions for sanctions against those that operate in the defense sector of the Burmese economy. In conjunction with this determination, OFAC is issuing [new guidance](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/added/2023-08-23).

### SANCTIONS ON BURMESE MILITARY JET FUEL SUPPLIERS

Today’s action targets two individuals and one entity involved in the procurement and distribution of jet fuel to Burma’s military, and two entities for being owned or controlled by such persons. In addition to disrupting the military regime’s access to jet fuel resources, today’s sanctions further align our actions with partners and allies.

**Khin Phyu Win **was previously associated with multiple jet fuel related companies within the Asia Sun Group, which imported jet fuel on behalf of Burma’s military regime and was designated by OFAC on March 24, 2023 pursuant to E.O. 14014 for operating in the defense sector of the Burmese economy. Khin continues to maintain an interest in the procurement and distribution of jet fuel through her ownership and **control of Shoon Energy PTE. LTD., PEIA PTE. LTD., **and **P.E.I Energy PTE. LTD., **which are Singapore-based holding companies. Shoon Energy PTE. LTD. was formally known as Asia Sun Aviation and is a part of the Asia Sun Group. Khin and Shoon Energy PTE. LTD. were also designated by the United Kingdom earlier this year. **Zaw Min Tun **became the director and owner of 11 Asia Sun Group companies after Khin transferred them to him, including Asia Sun Trading Company Limited, which was also designated by OFAC on March 24, 2023 pursuant to E.O. 14014 for operating in the defense sector of the Burmese economy. Zaw Min Tun was designated by the UK earlier this year as well.

Khin Phyu Win and Zaw Min Tun are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14014 for operating in the jet fuel sector of the Burmese economy.

Shoon Energy PTE. LTD. is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14014 for operating in the jet fuel sector of the Burmese economy and for being owned or controlled by, or acting for or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Khin Phyu Win.

P.E.I Energy PTE. LTD. and PEIA PTE. LTD. are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14014 for being owned or controlled by, or acting for or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Khin Phyu Win.

### SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, pursuant to E.O. 14014, all property and interests in property of the persons named above that are in the United States, or in the possession or control of U.S. persons, are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked.

Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or otherwise exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons. The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any blocked person or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

U.S. sanctions need not be permanent. Sanctions are intended to bring about a positive change of behavior. Consistent with the findings of Treasury’s Sanctions Review, the removal of sanctions is available for persons designated under E.O. 14014 who take concrete and meaningful actions to restore Burma’s path to democracy and disassociate themselves from the military regime in Burma.

For information concerning the process for seeking removal from any OFAC list, including the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List), please refer to OFAC’s [Frequently Asked Question 897](https://lnks.gd/l/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.eyJidWxsZXRpbl9saW5rX2lkIjoxMDIsInVyaSI6ImJwMjpjbGljayIsImJ1bGxldGluX2lkIjoiMjAyMjAzMTguNTUxMTM1NDEiLCJ1cmwiOiJodHRwczovL2hvbWUudHJlYXN1cnkuZ292L3BvbGljeS1pc3N1ZXMvZmluYW5jaWFsLXNhbmN0aW9ucy9mYXFzLzg5NyJ9.KmVy6qoZ5sQwxZagZ9St14-NFvqwBPTK3aqwF8bcIhc/s/1173460507/br/128334901135-l). Additional information regarding sanctions programs administered by OFAC can be found [here](https://lnks.gd/l/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.eyJidWxsZXRpbl9saW5rX2lkIjoxMDMsInVyaSI6ImJwMjpjbGljayIsImJ1bGxldGluX2lkIjoiMjAyMjAzMTguNTUxMTM1NDEiLCJ1cmwiOiJodHRwczovL2hvbWUudHJlYXN1cnkuZ292L3BvbGljeS1pc3N1ZXMvZmluYW5jaWFsLXNhbmN0aW9ucy9zYW5jdGlvbnMtcHJvZ3JhbXMtYW5kLWNvdW50cnktaW5mb3JtYXRpb24ifQ.0ZEGr42mNZr5hf19gUJlu_Sb0vewauh7e29lB_uYX08/s/1173460507/br/128334901135-l).

[For additional information regarding the sector determination and sanctions issued today, click here.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20230823)

###
