---
title: Treasury Department Announces Approval of Federal Funds to Connect Tens of Thousands of Homes and Businesses in New York to Affordable, High-Speed Internet
date: 2024-01-22
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2039
---
*Funds awarded through the American Rescue Plan’s Capital Projects Fund, part of President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda*

WASHINGTON – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury announced the approval of more than $228 million for high-speed internet projects in New York under the American Rescue Plan’s [Capital Projects Fund](https://lnks.gd/l/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.eyJidWxsZXRpbl9saW5rX2lkIjoxMDAsInVyaSI6ImJwMjpjbGljayIsInVybCI6Imh0dHBzOi8vaG9tZS50cmVhc3VyeS5nb3YvcG9saWN5LWlzc3Vlcy9jb3JvbmF2aXJ1cy9hc3Npc3RhbmNlLWZvci1zdGF0ZS1sb2NhbC1hbmQtdHJpYmFsLWdvdmVybm1lbnRzL2NhcGl0YWwtcHJvamVjdHMtZnVuZCIsImJ1bGxldGluX2lkIjoiMjAyNDAxMTguODg3ODEwNDEifQ.3Kk344tfys45IZmXjLi-cVfoHggsmKyT_vL0KEByKVI/s/2939116472/br/235634607181-l)(CPF), which the state estimates will connect tens of thousands of homes and businesses to affordable, high-speed internet. A key priority of the CPF program is making funding available for broadband infrastructure to expand economic opportunities and provide high-speed internet connectivity in underserved communities, including rural, Tribal, and other underserved communities.

“The pandemic upended life as we knew it and exposed the stark inequity in access to affordable and reliable high-speed internet in communities across the country,” said Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo. “This funding is a key piece of the Biden-Harris Administration’s historic investments to increase access to high-speed internet for millions of Americans and provide more opportunities to fully participate and compete in the 21st century economy.”

“New York’s ConnectALL initiative is delivering high-speed internet to thousands of families statewide, and this transformative federal investment will help us keep even more New Yorkers connected,” Governor Kathy Hochul said. “Access to affordable, reliable broadband keeps New Yorkers working, empowers our students, and connects families to critical benefits and services, and I thank the Biden administration, Majority Leader Schumer, and the New York delegation for their partnership in our mission to give all New Yorkers the tools they need to thrive.”

“Over $228 million is on the way from the feds to help rural and underserved communities across New York install the last mile of broadband infrastructure needed to help thousands of homes finally get high-speed internet. This is how we can close the digital divide in Upstate NY-- by making sure high-speed internet reaches corner of the state regardless of zip code,” said Majority Leader Chuck Schumer. “Broadband is not a luxury, it is a necessity, a utility as vital as electricity for success in our modern economy to ensure people can stay connected, have access to healthcare, jobs, and school. This is only the latest in hundreds of millions in federal funding from the American Rescue Plan and Bipartisan Infrastructure & Jobs Law that is helping the Empire State lead the nation in closing the digital divide. I am proud to work with Governor Hochul to help put these federal dollars to help bring affordable and equitable high-speed internet for all New Yorkers.”

“Limited access to reliable high-speed internet makes it harder for kids to do their homework, for seniors to access telehealth appointments, and for workers to take advantage of remote employment opportunities,” Senator Kirsten Gillibrand said. “High-quality internet is no longer a luxury – it is a necessity for everyday life. This federal investment will bring broadband to communities across New York that have lacked access for years and improve quality of life for New York families. I am proud to see the creation of this new grant program and I will keep fighting for federal resources to close the digital divide once and for all.”

“In New York and throughout America, there are far too many under-resourced communities without the ability to connect online and engage with family, work, school and telemedicine,” said Democratic Leader Hakeem Jeffries. “Last Congress, working with President Biden, House Democrats passed the American Rescue Plan, which saved the economy from a deep recession and enacted life-changing policies. Democrats then passed the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act to ensure that every community nationwide has access to high-speed internet and invested $65 billion to expand broadband access. I thank Governor Hochul, Leader Schumer and the New York congressional delegation for their work in bringing high-speed internet to every single New Yorker.”

“Today, reliable broadband access is essential for New York families who depend on the internet for work, education, and daily activities,” Representative Nydia M. Velázquez said. “This $228 million in federal funding, made possible by the American Rescue Plan, which I was proud to help pass in Congress, will allow our state to take a big step toward closing the digital divide and ensuring reliable internet access for New Yorkers in underserved communities. I thank Governor Hochul for her commitment to building more equitable broadband infrastructure throughout New York and all the leaders that helped make this investment possible.”

“Reliable, high-speed internet access is no longer a luxury, it is a necessity,” Representative Brian Higgins said. “From education and remote work to healthcare and more, broadband is a vital utility for all. Thanks to funding from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, Governor Hochul is making historic investments in communities across the state facing the greatest digital disparities. This is a critical step in closing gaps in access for people of all ages.”

“I have long fought to increase internet access for New Yorkers, and in Congress, I helped secure more than $7 billion in the American Rescue Plan for the Emergency Connectivity Fund that has boosted connectivity more for people throughout our state and nation,” Representative Grace Meng said. “This $228 million, also from the American Rescue Plan, will help even more New Yorkers with accessing the internet, especially in underserved communities, and I hail this funding as well. As I have said, everybody deserves access to reliable, affordable and high-speed broadband, and I will continue fighting for even more money for internet access in New York and across the country.”

“Access to high speed and reliable Internet connectivity will have a tremendous impact on vulnerable communities in my district and around New York State, ensuring these families are not left behind by a digital divide,” Representative Adriano Espaillat said. “I was proud to join Senator Schumer to help deliver this significant federal funding through the American Rescue Plan and commend Gov. Hochul on her continued efforts to bolster Internet service and access to thousands of homes across our state.”“The digital divide disproportionately impacts marginalized communities by limiting access to essential resources and ultimately widening the socio-economic gap,” Representative Joe Morelle said. “With this investment in enhancing our broadband infrastructure, we can empower underserved regions in our state by providing greater opportunities in employment and education through connectivity. I’m proud to have worked with Senator Schumer to deliver this federal funding, and grateful for Governor Hochul’s commitment to creating a more inclusive a digitally connected New York.”

“Access to high-speed broadband internet is no longer a luxury; it is a necessity to keep up with and participate in our national and global economy,” Representative Ritchie Torres said. “This funding demonstrates the long-lasting impacts of President Biden's Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the importance of putting our money where our mouth is. For too long, communities like mine in the Bronx have been forgotten and neglected. Getting connected to the Internet is a crucial step as we uplift vulnerable communities and level the playing field.”

“Whether for their jobs, their schoolwork, or keeping in touch with loved ones, every Hudson Valley family relies on broadband. These federal funds are a huge step toward delivering affordable and accessible internet for every New Yorker, regardless of where they live,” said Representative Pat Ryan. “I'll continue to work with Governor Hochul, Senator Schumer, and partners across all levels of government to eliminate the digital divide and ensure broadband is available across the state.”

The CPF provides a total of $10 billion to states, territories, freely associated states, and Tribal governments to fund critical capital projects that expand economic opportunities and provide internet connectivity in communities with unmet needs. Through high-speed internet, digital technology, and multi-purpose community facility investments, CPF funding is both closing the digital divide and bringing workforce, education, and health care services to communities in need. In addition to the $10 billion provided by CPF, many governments are putting a portion of their [State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds](https://lnks.gd/l/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.eyJidWxsZXRpbl9saW5rX2lkIjoxMDEsInVyaSI6ImJwMjpjbGljayIsInVybCI6Imh0dHBzOi8vaG9tZS50cmVhc3VyeS5nb3Yvc3lzdGVtL2ZpbGVzLzEzNi9PY3RvYmVyLTIwMjMtUmVwb3J0aW5nLUJsb2ctUG9zdC5wZGYiLCJidWxsZXRpbl9pZCI6IjIwMjQwMTE4Ljg4NzgxMDQxIn0.Z6QdMbeziC55wjcaF2dRJJJT8lOTOxpB2baaXhcqA_s/s/2939116472/br/235634607181-l)(SLFRF) toward meeting the Biden-Harris Administration’s goal of connecting every American household to affordable, reliable high-speed internet.

[The award being announced today](https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/NY-CPF-Award-Fact-Sheet-2.pdf) will fund New York’s Municipal Infrastructure Program (MIP), a competitive grant program designed to fund local governments and internet service providers to build last-mile broadband infrastructure to tens of thousands of locations. The MIP will prioritize eligible applicants based on several categories including experience, cost, project readiness, broadband service quality, and digital equity impact. Today’s announcement is in addition to the $100 million in CPF funding the Treasury Department [awarded](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1374#:~:text=New%20York%20is%20approved%20to,to%20high%2Dspeed%20internet%20access.) to New York last year, which is being used to connect 100,000 low-income housing units and businesses to affordable, high-speed internet.

The Treasury Department began announcing state awards in [June 2022](https://lnks.gd/l/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.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.ZKtsx8JEE-H2IqlpF6FqCAv8kvCDIdhYiLAw5lv5pDk/s/2939116472/br/235634607181-l). To date, CPF has awarded more than $9 billion for broadband, digital technology, and multi-purpose community center projects in all states and the District of Columbia, which states estimate will reach over two million locations with expanded internet access, in addition to the hundreds of thousands of individuals who will be served annually by multi-purpose community facilities.

 

