---
title: Treasury Sanctions Sudanese Rapid Support Forces Commanders Expanding War
date: 2024-05-15T10:30:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2340
---
WASHINGTON — Today, the Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) sanctioned **Ali Yagoub Gibril** and **Osman Mohamed Hamid Mohamed**, pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 14098 **, ** for leading the Rapid Support Forces’ (RSF) war campaign. The RSF’s attacks in North Darfur, which started last month, have caused dozens of civilian casualties, including children. The RSF encirclement of North Darfur’s capital of El Fasher and recent fighting between the RSF and the Sudanese Armed Forces have endangered nearly one million Sudanese civilians in the last major safe haven in Darfur, impeded humanitarian access, increased the risk of mass atrocities, and could undermine vital peace efforts.

“While the Sudanese people continue to demand an end to this conflict, these commanders have been focused on expanding to new fronts and battling for control of more territory,” said Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Brian E. Nelson. “The United States will continue to use sanctions to support the peace process and act against those on either side who further perpetuate the conflict.”

## peace spoilers

**Ali Yagoub Gibril (Gibril)** is the RSF Central Darfur commander. Gibril has been instrumental in the RSF’s operations in Darfur, including recent RSF offensives in North Darfur. Gibril currently commands RSF troops around El Fasher, North Darfur, the last major SAF-controlled area in Darfur.

Gibril is being designated, pursuant to E.O. 14098, for being a foreign person who is or has been a leader, official, senior executive officer, or member of the board of directors of the RSF, an entity that has, or whose members have, engaged in actions or policies that threaten the peace, security, or stability of Sudan relating to the tenure of such leader, official, senior executive officer, or member of the board of directors.

**Osman Mohamed Hamid Mohamed (Hamid)** is a major general in the RSF and the group’s head of operations. He has given statements on behalf of the RSF after large RSF victories and is an important part of RSF operational planning.

Hamid is being designated, pursuant to E.O. 14098, for being a foreign person who is or has been a leader, official, senior executive officer, or member of the board of directors of the RSF, an entity that has, or whose members have, engaged in actions or policies that threaten the peace, security, or stability of Sudan relating to the tenure of such leader, official, senior executive officer, or member of the board of directors.

## SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated persons described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons.

In addition, financial institutions and other persons that engage in certain transactions or activities with the sanctioned entities and individuals may expose themselves to sanctions or be subject to an enforcement action. The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any designated person, or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the SDN List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to [OFAC’s Frequently Asked Question 897](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/897).  For detailed information on the process to [submit a request for removal from an OFAC sanctions list](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[Click here for more information on the individuals designated today.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20240515)

