---
title: U.S. Department of the Treasury, IRS Release Final Rules to Ensure Good-Paying Clean Energy Jobs, Expand Clean Energy Workforce As Part of President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda
date: 2024-06-18T08:45:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2413
---
*Rules provide clarity and certainty for prevailing wage and apprenticeship requirements in the Inflation Reduction Act and ensure clean energy jobs are good paying jobs. *

* *

WASHINGTON – The U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) released [final rules](https://www.federalregister.gov/public-inspection/2024-13331/increased-amounts-of-credit-or-deduction-for-satisfying-certain-prevailing-wage-and-registered) today on prevailing wage and registered apprenticeship (PWA) requirements in the Inflation Reduction Act. As part of the Biden-Harris Administration's Investing in America agenda, the final rules will help build a strong pipeline of highly-skilled workers to support the growth of the clean energy economy and ensure clean energy jobs are good-paying jobs.

Since the passage of the Inflation Reduction Act in 2022, announced investments in clean energy projects have projected the creation of more than 270,000 jobs, and studies project that more than 1.5 million additional jobs will be created because of the law over the next decade.

“President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act has driven an investment boom while ensuring that workers building the clean energy economy benefit from good pay and new opportunities to get ahead,”**said Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen**. “Treasury’s final rules ensure we have skilled workers ready to take advantage of the jobs being created by these historic investments.”

“This rule will ensure these tax breaks are providing real, tangible benefits to workers in communities across the country,”** said Acting Secretary of Labor Julie Su**. “From fair wages to training opportunities for workers, this administration is doing everything we can to make sure working people share in the prosperity of a clean energy future.”

“From Oregon to Maine, a clean energy manufacturing boom is happening across the nation and President Biden’s industrial strategy ensures America’s workers reap the benefits – good paying jobs, future facing careers, and the pride of making goods stamped ‘Made in the U.S.A.,’”** said Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm**.

“Meeting strong labor standards and building partnerships with unions will now be the norm for clean energy projects,”** said John Podesta, Senior Advisor to the President for International Climate Policy**. “Today’s final rules give clarity and certainty to developers and the workers they employ that clean energy jobs will be good jobs.”

Today’s final rules from Treasury – which were developed in close partnership with the Department of Labor (DOL) – provide clarity and certainty on the PWA requirements to ensure the clean energy transition is centered around workers. In general, if taxpayers pay prevailing wages to laborers and mechanics and hire registered apprentices for projects supported by most of the Inflation Reduction Act’s clean energy tax incentives, then taxpayers can claim an increased credit equal to five times the base incentive. This includes projects utilizing the investment and production tax credits that help finance utility-scale wind, solar, and battery storage projects, as well as for credits for carbon capture, utilization, and storage and clean hydrogen projects.

The intent of the PWA requirements is to spur more clean energy projects that lead to good-paying, high-quality jobs – similar to projects that are already underway all across the country. In Wisconsin, for example, five construction unions [forged](https://finance-commerce.com/2024/03/wisconsin-utilities-vow-to-use-union-labor-for-future-renewable-projects/) an agreement with Wisconsin’s top utility providers to ensure union workers will be hired for most future utility-scale solar, wind, and battery storage projects in Wisconsin. And in Oregon, Wheatridge Renewable Energy Facility – one of the largest hybrid wind, solar and storage facilities in America and co-owned by Portland General Electric and NextEra Energy – has already put about 2,000 members of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local 112 [to work](https://www.ibew.org/articles/24ElectricalWorker/EW2406/IBEW%20EW%20V18%20N06.pdf), with more to come.

To help workers, unions and the public learn more about the jobs being created nationwide by more than 1,000 planned clean energy projects, DOL recently launched an [interactive map](https://www.dol.gov/general/good-jobs/cleanenergyprojects) that estimates the number of workers at each project who stand to benefit if taxpayers satisfy the prevailing wage and apprenticeship requirements. Biden-Harris Administration officials and staff will be conducting webinars, briefings and other engagements over the coming months to help educate workers about these rules and their associated tools and resources.

Ensuring that taxpayers that claim Clean Energy credits have met their obligations – particularly enforcing the PWA requirements for increased credits – is a top priority for the IRS. Today, the IRS is announcing that in the months ahead, the IRS will dedicate significant resources to promoting and enforcing compliance with the final clean energy rules. The IRS is also releasing a new PWA Fact Sheet that provides a summary of the PWA requirements and information for how to alert the IRS of suspected tax violations related to the PWA increase. The IRS takes referrals of alleged tax violations seriously and may use the information received about potential violations in connection with any applicable audit.

To support the IRS’s efforts in ensuring taxpayer compliance with the prevailing wage and apprenticeship requirements under the Inflation Reduction Act, DOL and the IRS are working on a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to be signed by the end of the year. Harnessing DOL’s extensive prevailing wage and registered apprenticeship expertise, the MOU will facilitate joint and cooperative education and public outreach and development of training content for IRS examination personnel. The MOU will also facilitate DOL’s review and comment as part of the development of PWA tax forms. Finally, the MOU will formalize a process for DOL to share with IRS any credible tips or information DOL receives as to potential noncompliance with the PWA requirements.

Treasury and DOL also encourage developers to consider project labor agreements as a strategy to help ensure compliance with the PWA requirements. The final rules include special provisions for project labor agreements, which can help taxpayers comply with the PWA requirements. Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo and Acting Secretary of Labor Julie Su have co-authored a blog post explaining the key elements of these special provisions and emphasizing the importance of project labor agreements as a tool for complying with the PWA requirements.

The prevailing wage and apprenticeship requirements took effect in January 2023. Today’s final rules follow consideration of more than 300 public comments in response to the proposed ruled and will help streamline compliance. Details of the final rules include:

- Requiring that determinations of prevailing wage rates be made by DOL, consistent with the Davis-Bacon Act;
- Incentivizing practices that will encourage contemporaneous compliance;
- Implementing strong recordkeeping requirements;
- Guaranteeing that taxpayers with projects covered by qualifying project labor agreements do not need to pay penalties; and
- Clarifying apprenticeship requirements such as clearly defining what constitutes as a request for qualified apprentices, what constitutes as a response, and when the good faith effort exception applies.

Learn more about the PWA final rules:

- [Treasury and Department of Labor Blog Post on Project Labor Agreements by Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo and Acting Secretary of Labor Julie Su](https://home.treasury.gov/news/featured-stories/project-labor-agreements-a-best-practice-for-clean-energy-projects-seeking-to-meet-ira-wage-and-apprenticeship-standards)
- [White House Fact Sheet](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2024/06/18/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-announces-historic-rules-to-create-good-paying-high-quality-clean-energy-jobs/)
- [IRS PWA Overview](https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p5855.pdf)
- [IRS Press Release](https://www.irs.gov/newsroom/treasury-irs-release-guidance-on-the-prevailing-wage-and-apprenticeship-requirements-for-increased-credit-and-deduction-amounts-under-the-inflation-reduction-act)
- [IRS Fact Sheet](https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p5983.pdf)
- [IRS FAQs](https://www.irs.gov/credits-deductions/frequently-asked-questions-about-the-prevailing-wage-and-apprenticeship-under-the-inflation-reduction-act)
- [Department of Labor’s Interactive Map for Good Clean Energy Jobs Powered by the Inflation Reduction Act](https://www.dol.gov/general/good-jobs/cleanenergyprojects)
- [Department of Labor’s Prevailing Wage and the Inflation Reduction Act Overview](https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/IRA)
 

