---
title: Treasury Sanctions Sudanese Rapid Support Forces Procurement Director
date: 2024-10-08
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2635
---
WASHINGTON — Today, the Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) sanctioned **Algoney Hamdan Daglo Musa**(Algoney), pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 14098, for leading efforts to supply weapons to continue the war in Sudan. The war between the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and the Rapid Support Forces (RSF) has caused immense devastation, leaving tens of thousands dead, more than 11 million displaced, and millions facing emergency levels of hunger.  Algoney is the procurement director of the RSF and a brother of Mohammed Hamdan Daglo (Hemedti), the leader of the RSF. Algoney has extended this war by leading RSF efforts to procure weapons and military materiel. By arming the RSF, his actions have directly contributed to the RSF’s ongoing siege of El Fasher in North Darfur, a city of nearly two million vulnerable civilians, and the RSF’s operations elsewhere in Sudan.

“At a time when the United States, the United Nations, the African Union, and others are advocating for peace, key individuals on both sides—including Algoney Hamdan Daglo Musa—continue to procure weapons to facilitate attacks and other atrocities against their own citizens,” said Acting Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Bradley T. Smith. “The United States will continue to hold accountable those who seek to prolong this conflict and restrict access to vital humanitarian assistance at a time of famine and fragility.”

## Key RSF procurement official

**Algoney**is the RSF’s procurement director and one of the younger brothers of Mohammed Hamdan Daglo (Hemedti), the head of the RSF. He is close to Hemedti, having also previously worked as his personal secretary. Algoney is a key officer within the RSF, especially given Hemedti’s preference for staffing key roles in the organization with his family members. Algoney has controlled RSF front companies, including the OFAC-sanctioned Tradive General Trading, which imported vehicles to Sudan on behalf of the RSF.

Algoney is being designated, pursuant to E.O. 14098, for being a foreign person who is or has been a leader, official, senior executive officer, or member of the board of directors of the RSF, an entity that has, or whose members have, engaged in actions or policies that threaten the peace, security, or stability of Sudan relating to the tenure of such leader, official, senior executive officer, or member of the board of directors.

## SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated persons described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons.

In addition, financial institutions and other persons that engage in certain transactions or activities with the sanctioned entities and individuals may expose themselves to sanctions or be subject to an enforcement action. The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any designated person, or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN) List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to [OFAC’s Frequently Asked Question 897 here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20230914). For detailed information on the process to submit a request for [removal from an OFAC sanctions list, please click here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[Click here for more information on the individuals and entities designated today](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20241008).

