---
title: Treasury Targets ISIS-linked Human Smuggling Network in Coordinated Action with Türkiye
date: 2024-06-14
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2406
---
WASHINGTON — Today, the United States imposed sanctions on four individuals with links to the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), including members of an ISIS-linked human smuggling network. The investigations into these targets, as well as their subsequent designations, were taken in close coordination with the Government of Türkiye. As a result of this close cooperation, the Government of Türkiye is concurrently taking its own domestic action against this network.

“Today’s coordinated action with Türkiye demonstrates our continued commitment to the defense of the homeland against all terrorist threats, including the so-called Islamic State or ISIS,” said Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Brian E. Nelson. “Alongside our partners, we will remain vigilant and continue to leverage our full suite of tools to identify and disrupt the illicit networks that support ISIS operations.”

### CRIMINAL EURASIAN SMUGGLING NETWORK LINKED TO ISIS

Uzbekistan-based **Olimkhon Makhmudjon Ugli Ismailov**(**Ismailov**) is involved in the ISIS-linked human smuggling network. **Muhammad Ibrohimjon Niyazov **(**Niyazov**)is a supporter of this network, who separately provided administrative and logistics support for ISIS members in Türkiye. Also designated today is **Muhammadyusuf Alisher Ogli Mirzoev **(**Mirzoev**), who in mid-2023 was involved in work to establish an ISIS militant training camp.

Ismailov, Niyazov, and Mirzoev are being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for having materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services to or in support of, ISIS, a person whose property and interest in property are blocked pursuant to E.O. 13224.

Additionally, today, the Department of State designated **Adam Khamirzaev **(**Khamirzaev**), the ISIS Georgia Province emir. Khamirzaev provided guidance to this smuggling network on activities in support of ISIS. Khamirzaev is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for being a leader of ISIS, a person whose property and interest in property are blocked pursuant to E.O. 13224.

### SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the individuals named above, and of any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by them, individually, or with other blocked persons, that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons must be blocked and reported to OFAC. OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all dealings by U.S. persons or within the United States (including transactions transiting the United States) that involve any property or interests in property of designated or blocked persons.

Furthermore, engaging in certain transactions with the individuals designated today entails risk of secondary sanctions pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended. Pursuant to this authority, OFAC can prohibit or impose strict conditions on the opening or maintaining in the United States of a correspondent account or a payable-through account of a foreign financial institution that knowingly conducted or facilitated any significant transaction on behalf of a Specially Designated Global Terrorist.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the SDN List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to [OFAC’s Frequently Asked Question 897](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/897).  For detailed information on the process to [submit a request for removal from an OFAC sanctions list](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[View identifying information related to today’s action.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20240614)

