---
title: 'Filing Season 2024 Report Card: IRS Builds On 2023 Progress, Delivers World Class Customer Service Thanks to Inflation Reduction Act'
date: 2024-04-15
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2250
---
*IRS Achieved 88% Level of Service, Cut Call Wait Times to 3 Minutes, Answered 1 Million More Calls Than Filing Season 2023, Saved Taxpayers 1.4 Million Hours of Hold Time*

*31 Million Taxpayer Views of New and Improved “Where’s My Refund” Tool*

*More than 170,000 additional taxpayers served at Taxpayer Assistance Centers*

WASHINGTON – Thanks to resources from President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act, the IRS has built on the progress made during Filing Season 2023, delivering world class service in Filing Season 2024. The IRS achieved an 88% Level of Service on the phones, exceeding Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen’s goal of 85%. The agency also cut phone wait times to three minutes, answered more than 1 million more calls through live assistance, and saved taxpayers more than 1.4 million hours of hold time. Taxpayers have benefitted from the new and improved “Where’s My Refund” tool 31 million times, and the IRS has served more than 170,000 additional taxpayers in-person at Taxpayer Assistance Centers than last Filing Season. This marks a vast improvement over 2022, when, due to a lack of resources, the IRS hit just 15% Level of Service to taxpayers and millions of refunds were delayed for months.

## IRS Provides Better Phone Service

- **IRS Achieves 88% Level of Service; Exceeds 85% Level of Service Goal:**The IRS has achieved an 88% Level of Service on the agency’s main taxpayer helpline during Filing Season 2024, exceeding its goal of 85%. Phone service has improved while call volume is up around 13% compared to 2023. During Filing Season 2022—prior to receiving Inflation Reduction Act resources—the IRS hit just 15% Level of Service.
- **IRS Achieves 3-Minute Call Wait Time; Exceeds 5-Minute Call Wait-Time Goal**: The IRS has achieved average call wait times of three minutes, exceeding its goal of call wait times of five minutes or less on the agency’s main taxpayer helpline during filing season. During Filing Season 2022—prior to receiving Inflation Reduction Act resources—call wait times were 28 minutes.
- **IRS Answers More Than 1 Million More Calls Than Filing Season 2023, Nearly 3 Million More Calls Than Filing Season 2022:**The IRS has answered about 17% or more than 1 million more calls through April 6 than in Filing Season 2023. Phone service has improved even though call volume is up around 13% compared to 2023. The IRS has answered nearly 3 million more calls compared to Filing Season 2022—prior to receiving Inflation Reduction Act resources.
- **IRS Saves Taxpayers 1.4 Million Hours of Hold Times Through Expanded Call Back Availability:**The IRS has saved taxpayers 1.4 million hours of hold time by expanding its call back option so it is available to 97% of eligible taxpayers at the beginning of the call if the projected wait time is longer than 15 minutes.

## IRS Provides Better In-Person Service

- **IRS Provides More Than 11,000 Additional Hours of In-Person Service:**The IRS has currently opened or reopened 54 Taxpayer Assistance Centers using Inflation Reduction Act funding. The IRS has achieved more than 11,000 additional hours of service at Taxpayer Assistance Centers, exceeding its goal of providing more than 8,500 hours additional hours of service. Overall, the IRS has served more than 170,000 additional taxpayers in-person at Taxpayer Assistance Centers than last Filing Season.
- **IRS Increases In-Person Tax Preparation Support by more than 200,000 Returns:**The IRS increased the number of taxpayers receiving free tax preparation through volunteers by around 200,000 returns, exceeding its goal of 50,000.

## Taxpayers View New and Improved “Where’s My Refund” 31 Million Times

- This Filing Season, taxpayers benefitted from important updates to the “Where’s My Refund?” tool, which is the most popular IRS customer service tool. Taxpayers have used “Where’s My Refund” 275 million times this Filing Season, with around 31 million views of the new and improved status updates as of April 6.
- Prior to this Filing Season, “Where’s My Refund?” provided limited information, often leading taxpayers to call the IRS to inquire about their refund status. The updates to “Where’s My Refund” allowed taxpayers to see more detailed refund status messages in plain language. These updates have also ensured “Where’s My Refund” works seamlessly on mobile devices. Taxpayers often see a generic message stating that their returns are still being processed and to check back later. With the new and improved “Where’s My Refund,” taxpayers see clearer and more detailed updates, including whether the IRS needs them to respond to a letter requesting additional information. The new updates reduce the need for taxpayers to call the IRS for answers to basic questions about their refund.Example of current message: Your tax return is still being processed. A refund date will be provided when available. For more information about processing delays, please see our Refund Frequently Asked Questions.Example of new and improved messages: To protect you from identity theft, your tax return is currently being reviewed. To help us process your return more quickly, verify your identity and tax return information. If you recently received a letter from us, follow the instructions on the letter. Please have your tax return (Form 1040 series) available and read the website or letter before starting the verification process. If you already reviewed your identity and tax return information you may check the status of your refund in 2-3 weeks.We received your return and sent you a letter requesting more information. Please respond by following the instructions in the letter. If you don’t respond, your refund amount could be changed. It may take 2-3 weeks for you to receive the letter.We have reviewed your return and any information we may have requested from you and are now processing your return. Any changes to the status of your refund, including any new refund date, will be reflected here when any new update is available.

## Paperless Processing Initiative: Taxpayers Able to Digitally Respond to All Correspondence, E-File 13 Additional Tax Forms

- The IRS has advanced the first two goals of the Paperless Processing Initiative, unveiled by Secretary Yellen and Commissioner Werfel in August 2023.
- First, taxpayers can digitally submit all correspondence and responses to notices. The IRS in February 2023 launched the ability to submit nine notices through the Document Upload Tool. Prior to Filing Season 2023, taxpayers could only submit these documents through the mail. As of April 12, 2024, the IRS has received nearly 900,000 responses to notices via the online tool. As a result of achieving this goal, the IRS estimates more than 94% of individual taxpayers will no longer have to send mail to the IRS. Taxpayers use these non-tax forms to request or submit information on a range of topics, including identity theft and proof of eligibility for key credits and deductions to help working Americans. Reaching this milestone will enable up to 125 million paper documents per year to be submitted digitally. Taxpayers who want to submit paper returns and correspondence may continue to do so.
- Second, taxpayers can e-File 13 additional tax forms, with 4.4 million forms filed digitally through April 6.

## For Further Information:

- [Strategic Operating Plan](https://www.irs.gov/about-irs/irs-inflation-reduction-act-strategic-operating-plan)
- [IRS.gov Tools](https://www.irs.gov/help/let-us-help-you)
- [Taxpayer Experience Days](https://www.irs.gov/help/irs-face-to-face-saturday-help)
- [Taxpayer Online Account](https://www.irs.gov/payments/your-online-account)
- [Tax Information in Non-English Languages](https://www.irs.gov/help/languages)

