---
title: Treasury Targets Venezuelan Officials Aligned with Nicolas Maduro in Response to Electoral Fraud
date: 2024-09-12T10:30:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2577
---
WASHINGTON — Today, the Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) designated 16 Maduro-aligned officials who obstructed a competitive and inclusive presidential election process in Venezuela and violated the civil and human rights of the people. The individuals sanctioned today pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13692, as amended, include leaders of the Maduro-aligned National Electoral Council (CNE) and the Supreme Tribunal of Justice (TSJ) who impeded a transparent electoral process and the release of accurate election results, as well as the military, intelligence, and government officials responsible for intensifying repression through intimidation, indiscriminate detentions, and censorship. The officials were appointed by Nicolas Maduro, whom OFAC sanctioned in 2017.

“Today, the United States is taking decisive action against Maduro and his representatives for their repression of the Venezuelan people and denial of their citizens’ rights to a free and fair election,” said Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo. “The Treasury Department is targeting key officials involved in Maduro’s fraudulent and illegitimate claims of victory and his brutal crackdown on free expression following the election, as the overwhelming majority of Venezuelans call for change. The Biden-Harris Administration will continue to use our tools to hold Maduro and his cronies accountable and support the democratic aspirations of the Venezuelan people.”

Since the July 28 election, Maduro and his representatives have indiscriminately arrested Venezuelans for exercising their political and civil rights and deployed a range of intimidation tactics to silence the opposition. These acts, including the issuance of an arrest warrant for the successful presidential candidate, Edmundo Gonzalez Urrutia (Gonzalez), which forced him to depart Venezuela to seek asylum in Spain.

Concurrently, the Department of State [imposed](http://www.state.gov/sanctions-and-visa-restrictions-on-venezuelan-individuals-aligned-with-nicolas-maduro-in-response-to-electoral-fraud) new visa restrictions under Presidential Proclamation 9931 on Maduro-aligned officials who have undermined the electoral process in Venezuela and are responsible for acts of repression. With these newly imposed visa restrictions, nearly 2,000 individuals have been subject to visa restrictions for their role in undermining democracy, significant corruption, and human rights violations.

## DESIGNATED Venezuelan officials

The following individuals who obstructed democratic political participation and undermined the election process were designated today pursuant to E.O. 13692, “Blocking Property and Suspending Entry of Certain Persons Contributing to the Situation in Venezuela,” as amended, for being current or former officials of the GOV.

**Inocencio Antonio Figueroa Arizaleta**(Figueroa)is a judge serving in the Maduro-aligned TSJ since 2014, currently in the TSJ’s Constitutional Chamber. Previously, he served as magistrate of the TSJ’s Political-Administrative Chamber, according to multiple press reports.

Additionally, according to media coverage, in his capacity as a TSJ judge, Figueroa supported the Electoral Chamber’s decision to review and certify the CNE’s claim that Maduro won the election. Figueroa participated in the TSJ’s expert technical review at the CNE, and he was involved in summoning presidential candidates and political party leaders to the TSJ as part of the Maduro-backed electoral review process. In 2019, Canada sanctioned Figueroa for undermining democracy.

**Malaquias Gil Rodriguez**(Gil) is a judge serving as the president of TSJ’s Political-Administrative chamber since 2022. Previously, he served as the vice president of the TSJ’s Electoral Chamber; he has held a position in the judiciary since 2010.

Additionally, according to credible media sources, Gil has obstructed democracy by disqualifying Machado’s presidential candidacy. In 2018, Canada sanctioned Gil for corruption and violation of human rights.

**Juan Carlos Hidalgo Pandares**(Hidalgo)is a judge serving as a vice president on the TSJ’s Political-Administrative chamber since 2022. Previously, Hidalgo served as a general of the National Bolivarian Guard and prosecutor general of the military.

Additionally, according to media sources, Hidalgo has obstructed democracy by disqualifying Machado’s presidential candidacy.

**Caryslia Beatriz Rodriguez Rodriguez**(Rodriguez) heads the Maduro-aligned TSJ. Rodriguez has been the president of the TSJ since January 2024 and heads the TSJ’s Electoral Chamber.

Additionally, according to media sources, Rodriguez and the Electoral Chamber certified Maduro’s baseless claim that he had won the election despite well-founded accusations of widespread voter fraud in July’s election.

**Fanny Beatriz Marquez Cordero**(Marquez) is the vice president of the TSJ and member of the Electoral Chamber.

Marquez was among the officials from the Electoral Chamber who supervised the process of technical appraisal of the evidentiary material submitted by the CNE, political organizations, and former candidates participating in the presidential elections of July 28, 2024. Several news outlets stated Marquez was among the officials from the Electoral Chamber who certified Maduro’s baseless claim to victory.

**Edward Miguel Briceno Cisneros**(Briceno) is the special judge of the Maduro-aligned First Court of the First Instance with jurisdiction over terrorism.

Additionally, according to media sources, Briceno issued an arrest warrant for Gonzalez less than an hour after the Public Prosecutor’s office requested it for the charges of crimes of usurpation of functions, incitement to disobedience of laws, conspiracy, sabotage to damage systems, and association with opposition members whom Maduro considers criminals.

**Luis Ernesto Duenez Reyes**(Duenez) is a prosecutor in the Maduro-aligned Public Prosecutor’s office. In his position, Duenez issued the official request for the arrest warrant targeting opposition presidential candidate Edmundo Gonzalez, which was then issued by Briceno.  Gonzalez fled Venezuela into exile to Spain on September 8.**Rosalba Gil Pacheco**(Gil Pacheco) is a CNE rector serving since 2023 as president of the Maduro-aligned CNE’s Civil and Electoral Registry Commission. She also served as the secretary of the Maduro-aligned National Assembly since January 2021.

Gil Pacheco, has obstructed democracy by instituting a restrictive new rule for poll watcher eligibility, instituting electoral registration irregularities, and intentionally delaying voting center processes. Also, Gil Pacheco declared Maduro the winner of the presidential election without publishing precinct-level results and without conducting the required audits of the country’s electronic voting system, among other electoral irregularities, according to widely disseminated press reports.

**Antonio Jose Meneses Rodriguez**(Meneses)is the CNE Secretary General serving since August 2023.

Meneses, according to news reports, instituted a restrictive new rule for poll watcher eligibility, introducing electoral registration irregularities, and intentionally delaying voting center processes. Before serving on the CNE, he also signed the document from the Comptroller’s Office upholding Machado’s disqualification.

**Dinorah Yoselin Bustamante Puerta**(Bustamante)is a prosecutor serving at the Venezuelan First Special Court of First Instance, an office within the Maduro-aligned Directorate-General of Military Counter-Intelligence (DGCIM).

Additionally, according to media sources, Bustamante obstructed democracy and the rule of law by initiating politically motivated prosecutions, which resulted in the arbitrary detention of members of the U.S.-recognized 2015 National Assembly and other officials opposed to Maduro. The European Union, United Kingdom, and Switzerland sanctioned Bustamante in 2020 according to sanctions databases.

**Pedro Jose Infante Aparicio**(Aparicio)serves as the first vice president of the Maduro-aligned National Assembly. He also served as president of the *Special Commission for the Investigation and Prosecution of Opposition Parties and Representatives of the 2016-2021 Legislature for the Dispossession and Theft of CITGO* as part of the “Bolivarian Fury” campaign launched in January 2024 against the democratic opposition. In that position, the commission subpoenaed several opposition members in seemingly politically motivated prosecutions.

**Domingo Antonio Hernandez Larez**(Hernandez) is the Strategic Operational Commander of the Maduro-aligned Bolivarian National Armed Forces (FANB), serving since July 2021. Hernandez previously served as the Commander of Strategic Region for the Integral Defense Capital (REDI Capital).

Hernandez was denounced by a human rights defender in 2019 as a repressor on behalf of Maduro due to the increase in repression and systematic harassment by intelligence and security agencies recorded in the areas under his control. Additionally, according to various press pieces, FANB has carried out acts of repression against Venezuelans, including arbitrary arrests and threatening those who participate in peaceful protests.

**Elio Ramon Estrada Paredes**(Estrada) is the Commander of the Maduro-aligned Bolivarian National Guard (GNB), serving since July 2023. In that position, Estrada leads the Anti-Terrorism Directorate of the GNB that carries out intelligence work to detect and capture those involved in alleged destabilizing plans and other crimes.

Under Estrada’s command and ahead of the election, the GNB harassed and detained Venezuelans on suspicions of materially supporting Machado on the campaign trail, according to numerous news sources. Estrada led the GNB in arresting thousands of peaceful pro-democracy protestors after the July 28 election.

**Johan Alexander Hernandez Larez**(Larez) is Commander of REDI Capital of the GNB. Larez was previously the Division General for the Integral Defense Zone in Miranda State, or Zona Operativa de Defensa Integral del Estado Miranda, commonly referenced to as ZODI Miranda State.**Asdrubal Jose Brito Hernandez**(Brito) is the Director of Criminal Investigations of the DGCIM. Brito was formerly the counterintelligence director of the presidential detail.

Brito is identified as a torturer in United Nations reporting, and according to multiple press pieces, DGCIM has led a coordinated “Operation Knock Knock” campaign to harass, detain, and arbitrarily arrest opposition and civil society members following the election.

**Miguel Antonio Munoz Palacios**(Munoz) is the Deputy Director of the Maduro-aligned intelligence service *Servicio Bolivariano de Inteligencia*(SEBIN) since 2021.

SEBIN has carried out Maduro’s politically motivated arrests and detentions of opposition leaders, volunteers, poll workers, and election witnesses. Munoz is one of the top leaders of Venezuela’s Pitbull Group, a group consisting of SEBIN personnel from the General Directorate for Military Counterintelligence. The Pitbull Group was tasked to do the “dirty work,” and there were no legal parameters with what they were tasked to do. The Pitbull Group was also believed to be responsible for kidnapping and murders. The group likely kidnapped individuals to pressure them to give the Pitbull Group money. The Pitbull Group used that money for other operational purposes.

## PREVIOUS TREASURY ACTIONS TARGETING VENEZUELAN OFFICIALS

Today’s action builds on multiple actions that OFAC has taken to target current or former Venezuelan officials, pursuant to E.O. 13692 as amended, for taking anti-democratic actions and violating human rights.  To date, OFAC has sanctioned over 140 Venezuelan individuals and 100 Venezuelan entities, including:

### Key Venezuelan Officials

- Nicolas Maduro Moros – sanctioned since 2017
- Tarek William Saab – sanctioned since 2017
- Jorge Elieser Marquez Monsalve – sanctioned since 2017
- Celia Adela Flores de Maduro – sanctioned since 2018
- Delcy Eloina Rodriguez Gomez – sanctioned since 2018
- Diosdado Cabello Rondon – sanctioned since 2018
- Jose David Cabello Rondon – sanctioned since 2018
- Marleny Josefina Contreras Hernandez – sanctioned since 2018
- Vladimir Padrino Lopez – sanctioned since 2018
- Jorge Jesus Rodriguez Gomez – sanctioned since 2018
- Remigio Ceballos Ichaso – sanctioned since 2019
- Nicolas Ernesto Maduro Guerra – sanctioned since 2019

### Key Military and Intelligence Officials

- Gustavo Enrique Gonzalez Lopez – sanctioned since 2015
- Ivan Rafael Hernandez Dala – sanctioned since 2019
- Hildemaro Jose Rodriguez Mucura – sanctioned since 2019
- Rafael Enrique Bastardo Mendoza – sanctioned since 2019

### National Electoral Council Officials

- Elvis Eduardo Hidrobo Amoroso – sanctioned since 2017
- Carlos Enrique Quintero Cuevas – sanctioned since 2017
- Conrado Antonio Perez Linares – sanctioned since 2020
- Fabio Enrique Zavarse Pabon – sanctioned since 2018

### Supreme Tribunal of Justice Officials and Former Officials

- Gladys Maria Gutierrez Alvarado – sanctioned since 2018
- Maikel Jose Moreno Perez – sanctioned since 2018
- Calixto Antonio Ortega Rios – sanctioned since 2018
- Luis Fernando Damiani Bustillos – sanctioned since 2018
- Arcadio de Jesus Delgado Rosales – sanctioned since 2018
- Carmen Auxiliadora Zuleta de Merchan – sanctioned since 2018
- Lourdes Benicia Suarez Anderson – sanctioned since 2018
- Juan Jose Mendoza Jover – sanctioned since 2018

## SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated persons described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons. U.S. persons may face civil or criminal penalties for violations of E.O. 13692. Non-U.S. persons are also prohibited from causing or conspiring to cause U.S. persons to wittingly or unwittingly violate U.S. sanctions, as well as engaging in conduct that evades U.S. sanctions. OFAC’s [Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines](https://ofac.treasury.gov/media/7566/download?inline) provide more information regarding OFAC’s enforcement of U.S. sanctions, including the factors that OFAC generally considers when determining an appropriate response to an apparent violation.

In addition, financial institutions and other persons that engage in certain transactions or activities with the sanctioned entities and individuals may expose themselves to sanctions or be subject to an enforcement action. The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any designated person, or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the SDN List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to [OFAC’s Frequently Asked Question 897 here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/897). [For detailed information on the process to submit a request for removal from an OFAC sanctions list, please click here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[Click here for more information on the individuals identified today](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20240912).

