---
title: "Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen at 5th Ukraine Ministerial Roundtable"
date: 2024-04-17
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2269
press_release_number: JY2269
---

As Prepared for Delivery
I thank Prime Minister Shmyhal and Minister Marchenko for addressing this group.
We condemn Russia’s unprovoked and horrific war, which has terrorized the Ukrainian people and caused massive economic damage. It has also led to devastating effects around the world, including food insecurity. Ukraine has shown valiant resilience, and its government has done remarkable work providing for its people and addressing barriers that have hindered sustainable growth in the past, including corruption and governance. Ukraine’s positive performance on its IMF program has been key for delivering macroeconomic stability and advancing reforms.
We also appreciate the World Bank and the EBRD’s support for Ukraine both in the near term and in laying the foundation for recovery and reconstruction. I am pleased to share that last week the United States completed an agreement with the World Bank to contribute $255 million to World Bank trust funds to support
Ukraine’s critical export transportation needs and fuel private sector investment in Ukraine. And we continue to urge the House of Representatives to act to provide critical military assistance and budget support for Ukraine as soon as possible.
The international community must continue to support Ukraine and make clear that Russia cannot win by prolonging the war. And, in response to Russia’s war of choice, our historic sanctions coalition will continue restricting the Russian military’s access to the technology, equipment, and funds.
Let me be clear about our unwavering support for Ukraine. We have provided significant budget support grants to Ukraine in addition to other economic and military assistance, and the United States remains committed to supporting Ukraine alongside our allies.
###
