---
title: U.S. Treasury Announces $47 Million in Awards from the SIPPRA Program
date: 2024-12-12
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2747
---
WASHINGTON – The U.S. Department of the Treasury is pleased to announce the next round of awards from the Social Impact Partnerships to Pay for Results Act (SIPPRA) program. Six awardees from across the nation are eligible to receive $46.9 million in payments if they successfully achieve their expected results.

The SIPPRA program is a pay for results program under which the federal government will make a payment only if the project meets predefined goals. The awards support projects that demonstrate measurable outcomes in areas such as reduced homelessness and improved children’s health while reducing governmental costs. By leveraging data and evidence-based practices, the SIPPRA program seeks to empower communities and improve the quality of life for those in need.

“Through the SIPPRA program, we are committed to driving meaningful change by funding initiatives that deliver results for our communities,” said U.S. Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo. “With financial backing from Treasury, these new projects will address critical challenges and create lasting impacts while encouraging efficiency and accountability.”

The six awardees are:

- The **City of Boise, Idaho **was awarded**$7.5 million **to provide permanent supportive housing and services using an intensive case management model including wrap-around services to households who are experiencing long-term homelessness and have high service needs. Boise is eligible for up to $6.6 million if it successfully reduces healthcare and judicial system costs to the federal, state, and local government.
- The **City of Jacksonville, Florida **was awarded**$5.8 million **to implement a universal nurse home visit for new parents to reduce infant emergency medical care visits. In addition, Jacksonville plans to offer a universal early literacy initiative through which health care providers coach parents on reading to their children. Jacksonville is eligible to receive up to $5 million if it successfully reduces emergency medical care visits.
- The **School Board of Leon County, Florida **was awarded**$4.6 million **to implement a universal nurse home visit for new parents to reduce infant emergency medical care visits. In addition, it plans to offer a universal early literacy initiative through which health care providers coach parents on reading to their children. Leon County is eligible to receive up to $4 million for successfully reducing emergency medical care visits.
- The **County of New Castle, Delaware **was awarded**$11 million **to implement a program that will provide up to 90 days of temporary housing, two years of rental assistance, and two years of case management and supportive services. New Castle is eligible to receive up to $9.6 million if it successfully increases permanent housing and decrease shelter stays.
- The **City of New York, New York **was awarded**$6.3 million **to serve some of the hardest-to-reach New Yorkers experiencing long-term unsheltered homelessness. In the Coordinated Behavioral Health Task Force Initiative, multiple stakeholders collaborate on the intensive engagement and care coordination. New York City is eligible to receive up to $5.5 million if it successfully increases stable housing for participants.
- The **County of Spartanburg, South Carolina **was awarded**$11.5 million **to implement a project enhancing pre-natal care, providing parenting classes, and sending nurses on home visits post-partum. Spartanburg is eligible to receive $10 million if it successfully reduces ER visits and decreases maternal depression.

A portion of each award is reserved for evaluating the results of the program by an independent evaluator. If the independent evaluator shows that the awardee was successful, Treasury will make a payment to the awardee.

SIPPRA funding is awarded through a competitive process. Treasury selected these projects based on the strength of their application, input from the Commission on Social Impact Partnerships, and consultation with the Federal Interagency Council on Social Impact Partnerships.

In total, the SIPPRA program will have awarded more than $74 million to ten awardees across the nation since 2019. For more information about the SIPPRA program and the upcoming awards, please visit [https://home.treasury.gov/services/social-impact-partnerships/sippra-pay-for-results](https://home.treasury.gov/services/social-impact-partnerships/sippra-pay-for-results).

###
