---
title: Detailed Guidance and Press Schedule for Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen’s Travel to Brazil
date: 2024-07-22T06:00:00-04:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2474
---
WASHINGTON – From July 24-27, Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen will travel to Rio de Janeiro to participate in a G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting along with bilateral engagements with her counterparts, and events on the margins. Afterwards, on July 27, Secretary Yellen will travel to Belem, Brazil to participate in a meeting of Amazon basin ministers hosted by the Inter-American Development Bank and will participate in events furthering Treasury’s international climate efforts.

During the G20, Secretary Yellen will further America’s leadership role within the multilateral system, which advances our national interests by expanding economic opportunities for the U.S. and our trading partners and fostering cooperation on global challenges. In her meetings, Secretary Yellen will engage with counterparts to advance shared objectives, such as continued efforts to strengthen the global economy, which has improved from previous gatherings – driven significantly by America’s historic economic recovery under President Biden. Secretary Yellen will work to build on the economic progress we have made and to bolster the global economy for the long-run – including through efforts underway to evolve Multilateral Development Banks, strengthen the International Monetary Fund, tackle climate change, and address sovereign debt distress. Secretary Yellen will also work to deepen ties with Brazil, an important economic partner and key ally on critical work that benefits both countries, as well as the world.

During the G20 and in meetings with allies and partners, Secretary Yellen will reiterate America’s resolute commitment to Ukraine and reaffirm the Biden Administration’s efforts to provide Ukraine with the aid it needs to sustain its defense, deny Russia access to the money and weapons it needs to wage its illegal war, and hold Russia accountable. While in Brazil, Secretary Yellen will also coordinate with G20 counterparts on work to counter destabilizing Iranian proxies and address the humanitarian and economic consequences of conflict in the Middle East.

Following the G20, Secretary Yellen will travel to Belem to deliver remarks highlighting the Biden-Harris Administration’s leadership on climate change, the work the United States is doing with partners and allies to take concrete actions to address this existential threat, and the importance of ongoing efforts to better position multilateral development banks to contribute to global climate goals. She will also participate in engagements with counterparts and the private sector to strengthen regional efforts to combat climate change, including a meeting of ministers from the Amazon basin hosted by the Inter-American Development Bank as well as a roundtable with counterparts to strengthen regional coordination and cooperation on illicit finance associated with nature crimes, especially in relation to the Amazon.

***Rio de Janeiro, Brazil* Wednesday, July 24**

At 8:15 PM BRT / 7:15 AM EDT, Secretary Yellen will participate in a bilateral meeting with Minister of Finance Fernando Haddad of Brazil. There will be a photo spray at the beginning of this meeting for pre-credentialed media. Media interested in attending should email [press@treasury.gov](mailto:press@treasury.gov).At 9:30 AM BRT / 8:30 AM EDT, Secretary Yellen will deliver remarks at the Pandemic Fund Investment Case Launch Event to announce the United States’ pledge to the Pandemic Fund for 2025-2026. There will be an extended spray to cover the Secretary’s remarks for pre-credentialed media. Media interested in attending should email [press@treasury.gov](mailto:mailto:press@treasury.gov).At 4:30 PM BRT / 3:30 PM EDT, Secretary Yellen will participate in a G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors meeting. This meeting is closed press.

** Thursday, July 25**

At 9:00 AM BRT / 8:00 AM EDT, Secretary Yellen will participate in a G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors meeting session on the global economic outlook and ongoing challenges. This meeting is closed press.

At 11:45 AM BRT / 10:45 AM EDT, Secretary Yellen will host a press conference outlining her key priorities for the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors meeting. This press conference will be open press. Media interested in attending should email [press@treasury.gov](mailto:press@treasury.gov). [This press conference will also be livestreamed here](https://www.youtube.com/@USTreasGov/featured).

At 4:15 PM BRT / 3:15 PM EDT, Secretary Yellen will participate in a G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors meeting session on international taxation. This meeting is closed press.At 2:15 PM BRT / 1:15 PM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in a bilateral meeting with Chancellor of the Exchequer Rachel Reeves of the United Kingdom. There will be an extended spray at the beginning of this meeting for pre-credentialed press. Media interested in attending should email [press@treasury.gov](mailto:press@treasury.gov).At 3:00 PM BRT / 2:00 PM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in a bilateral meeting with Minister of Economy and Finance Giancarlo Giorgetti of Italy. This meeting is closed press.At 3:45 PM BRT / 2:45 PM ET, Secretary Yellen will participate in a bilateral meeting with Commissioner for Economy Paolo Gentiloni of the European Commission. This meeting is closed press.

** Friday, July 26**

At 9:00 AM BRT / 8:00 AM EDT, Secretary Yellen will participate in a G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors meeting session on unlocking finance towards climate goals and sustainable development. This meeting is closed press.

At 11:00 AM BRT / 10:00 AM EDT, Secretary Yellen and Minister Haddad will deliver brief remarks to announce new efforts to strengthen joint efforts to combat climate change, which will be open to pre-credentialed media. Media interested in attending should email [press@treasury.gov](mailto:press@treasury.gov).

At 3:00 PM BRT / 2:00 PM EDT, Secretary Yellen will participate in a G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors meeting on capital flows, global debt, and multilateral development bank reform. This meeting is closed press.

While in Rio de Janeiro, Secretary Yellen will also participate in bilateral meetings with counterparts, including from the United Kingdom. More details to follow.

***Belem, Brazil* Saturday, July 27**

At 11:00 AM BRT / 10:00 AM EDT, Secretary Yellen will deliver remarks at an Inter-American Development Bank meeting of Amazon Basin finance, economy, and environment ministers. There will be an extended spray to cover the Secretary’s remarks for pre-credentialed media. Media interested in attending should email [press@treasury.gov](mailto:press@treasury.gov).

At 12:30 PM BRT / 11:30 AM EDT, Secretary Yellen and Inter-American Development Bank President Goldfajn will host a lunch and roundtable with Brazilian business and finance leaders, investors, policymakers on the role of the private sector in supporting the conservation and restoration of the Amazon. There will be an extended spray to cover the Secretary’s opening remarks at the beginning of this meeting for pre-credentialed media. Media interested in attending should email [press@treasury.gov](mailto:press@treasury.gov).

At 2:30 PM BRT / 1:30 PM EDT, Secretary Yellen will host a roundtable on nature crimes to advance regional cooperation against illicit finance associated with nature crimes. There will be an extended spray to cover the Secretary’s opening remarks at the beginning of this meeting for pre-credentialed media. Media interested in attending should email [press@treasury.gov](mailto:press@treasury.gov).

At 4:00 PM BRT / 3:00 PM EDT, Secretary Yellen will deliver remarks on the Biden-Harris Administration’s ongoing work with global allies and partners to tackle climate change. These remarks at the Goeldi Museum will be open press. Media interested in attending should email [press@treasury.gov](mailto:press@treasury.gov).

