---
title: U.S. Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo and Acting Secretary of Labor Julie Su to Travel to Philadelphia to Highlight Actions to Create Good-Paying Clean Energy Jobs and Expand Access to Capital for Small Businesses 
date: 2024-07-08
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2450
---
WASHINGTON – On Wednesday, July 10, U.S. Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo will travel to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania to discuss how the Biden-Harris Administration’s economic agenda is creating good-paying clean energy jobs and continuing the historic small business boom by expanding access to capital.

Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will highlight the Treasury Department’s recently released final rules on the Inflation Reduction Act’s prevailing wage and registered apprenticeship requirements to help build a strong pipeline of skilled workers to support the growth of the clean energy economy and ensure clean energy jobs are good-paying jobs. Investments in clean energy projects announced since the passage of the law in 2022 are projected to create more than 270,000 jobs, and studies estimate that more than 1.5 million additional jobs will be created over the next decade.

To discuss the impact of these rules, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will visit Sheetmetal Workers’ Union Local 19, which represents more than 4,300 skilled and licensed workers in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware who provide skilled professionals for the residential, commercial, and industrial sheet metal industry.

Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will also highlight the Biden-Harris Administration’s historic actions to expand access to capital for financially underserved rural and urban communities through community development financial institutions (CDFIs).

## Wednesday, July 10

At 10:30 AM ET, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo will convene a roundtable in the Philadelphia offices of Community First Fund, a private, independent non-profit Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) working to provide capital to small business leaders in underserved communities. The roundtable will focus on how the Biden-Harris Administration’s efforts to secure historic support for community lenders have helped Pennsylvania small businesses grow and thrive.

At 1:30 PM ET, Deputy Secretary Adeyemo and Acting Secretary of Labor Julie Su will tour a training facility operated by Sheet Metal Workers’ Local #19 to discuss Biden-Harris Administration actions to create good-paying clean energy jobs and expand the clean energy workforce, highlighting the Treasury Department’s recently released final rules on prevailing wages and registered apprenticeship requirements. Following the tour, both officials will have open media availability. This event is open to press who RSVP to [michael.martinez2@treasury.gov](mailto:michael.martinez2@treasury.gov).

