---
title: U.S. Department of the Treasury Releases New Data on New York Consumer Energy Savings Under Inflation Reduction Act
date: 2024-08-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2527
---
*In 2023, more than 189,000 New York families saved more than $374 million on clean energy and energy efficiency investments*

**WASHINGTON** – Today, in advance of the two-year anniversary of the Inflation Reduction Act, the U.S. Department of the Treasury (Treasury) released [new data](https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-clean-energy-tax-credit-statistics) from the IRS and [new analysis](https://home.treasury.gov/news/featured-stories/the-inflation-reduction-act-saving-american-households-money-while-reducing-climate-change-and-air-pollution) by the Office of Economic Policy showing that more than 189,000 New York families benefitted from more than $374 million in tax credits to lower the costs of clean energy and energy efficiency upgrades to their homes during 2023. Today’s announcement marks the first public release of data from 2023 tax filings showing the benefit of the Inflation Reduction Act’s clean energy tax incentives for consumers.

Nationwide, the number of families benefiting from these expanded credits for investments that lower their utility bills increased almost one third compared to tax year 2021, prior to passage of the Inflation Reduction Act, and the aggregate value of the credits increased by almost two thirds. The new data shows the Inflation Reduction Act is achieving its goal to lower both the upfront cost of clean energy and energy efficiency investments and monthly utility bills for American families.

In addition to upfront cost savings on home improvements, consumers will save on their energy bills for years to come. Recent research from U.S. national labs and analysis from Treasury’s Office of Economic Policy shows that after consumers adopt these upgrades, they can save hundreds or thousands of dollars per year on their utility bills, depending on the upgrades made to their homes. For example, household installing residential solar have saved a median of $2,230 annually, and households that install efficient heat pumps and improve building efficiency are expected to save up to $600, $1,200, or $3,100 per year, based on the type of heating and cooling system that is being replaced.

“The Biden-Harris Administration’s top economic priority is lowering costs for American families, and the Inflation Reduction Act is advancing that goal by making home energy upgrades more affordable and cutting monthly utility bills,” said **U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen.**“The law has lowered the cost of clean energy upgrades for more than 189,000 New York families, saving them hundreds, if not thousands, of dollars annually on their utility bills for many years to come.”

“Two years after it became law, the Inflation Reduction Act continues to strike a decisive blow against the climate crisis and lower energy costs for hardworking Americans as the largest federal climate investment in our nation’s history,” said **Democratic Leader Hakeem Jeffries (NY-08)**. “In New York alone last year, over 189,000 families have already received more than $374 million in tax credits for clean energy and energy efficiency investments in their homes. House Democrats will continue to work with the Biden-Harris administration to put people over politics and address the climate crisis with the fierce urgency of now.”

"This summer of 2022 legislation provided for the world’s greatest investment to combat climate change in history,” said **Representative Tom Suozzi (NY-03)**. “Among other things, 194,000 New York families received more than $374 million to promote energy-efficiency in their homes in 2023. I will always fight for New York families and our environment."

“Two years ago, Democrats in Congress came together to pass the most historic and consequential climate legislation in American history with the Inflation Reduction Act,” said **Representative Paul Tonko (NY-20), Ranking Member of the Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Environment, Manufacturing, & Critical Materials**. “This transformational law is securing our clean energy future, all while spurring unprecedented job growth and saving Americans on their energy bills. New Yorkers can take advantage of a wide range of tax incentives, including for purchasing electric vehicles, installing heat pumps and solar panels, and retrofitting their homes. I am committed to keeping up the fight for further climate action so that our communities can continue to reap these cost-saving benefits and so that future generations inherit a cleaner, healthier planet.”

New York families have claimed more than $241 million in credits for residential clean energy investments on 2023 tax returns filed and processed through May 23, 2024. This credit helps families afford investments in solar electricity generation, solar water heating, and battery storage, among others. Families have also claimed more than $132 million for energy efficient home improvements—which include heat pumps, efficient air conditioners, insulation, windows, and doors—during the same time span. These estimates are expected to increase as additional returns are filed and processed.

## Home Clean Energy Investments Nationwide

- More than 750,000 families claimed investments in residential solar electricity.

## Home Energy Efficiency Investments Nationwide

- More than 250,000 families claimed investments in electric or natural gas heat pumps.
- More than 100,000 families claimed investments in heat pump water heaters.
- Nearly 700,000 families claimed investments in insulation and air sealing.

## Background

The Inflation Reduction Act provides incentives for consumers to lower their energy bills and shield themselves from future spikes in fossil energy prices. The Inflation Reduction Act:

- Extended and expanded the **Energy Efficient Home Improvement Credit,**providing a total credit of up to $1,200 annually for investments like installing insulation or efficient windows and doors, with a special credit of as much as $2,000 for electric heat pumps that provide super-efficient heating and cooling, including a $150 credit for a home energy audit conducted by an inspector to help determine the best home improvement options.
- Extended the **Residential Clean Energy Credit**, ensuring that households will be able to continue receiving a tax credit to cover up to 30% of the costs of installing, among others, rooftop solar and battery storage through 2034.

