---
title: Treasury Sanctions Sudanese Commander Involved in Human Rights Abuses in West Darfur
date: 2024-11-12T10:30:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2710
---
WASHINGTON — Today, the Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is sanctioning **Abdel Rahman Joma’a Barakallah** (Barakallah) for his leadership role in the Rapid Support Forces (RSF), a primary party responsible for the ongoing violence against civilians in Sudan since April 2023. Barakallah led the RSF’s campaign in West Darfur, which was marked by credible claims of serious human rights abuses, including targeting of civilians, conflict-related sexual violence (CRSV), and ethnically motivated violence. This action is in furtherance of the United Nations Security Council’s November 8 designation of Barakallah and fellow RSF commander Osman Mohamed Hamid Mohamed, who was previously designated by the Department of the Treasury in May 2024.

“Today’s action underscores our commitment to hold accountable those who seek to facilitate these horrific acts of violence against vulnerable civilian populations in Sudan,” said Acting Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence Bradley T. Smith. “The United States remains focused on supporting an end to this conflict and calls on both sides to participate in peace talks and ensure the basic human rights of all Sudanese civilians.”

## SITUATION IN WEST DARFUR

Amidst the backdrop of broader conflict in Sudan, the RSF and allied militias, have orchestrated violence against local populations in Darfur. Among other acts, the RSF has engaged in targeted killings, looting, the use of heavy artillery in populated areas, and CRSV. Furthermore, the RSF and SAF have both undermined the delivery of humanitarian aid, further threatening the Sudanese people amidst the broader war. Promoting accountability for conflict-related sexual violence committed by groups such as the RSF is a top priority for President Biden, who signed a [Presidential Memorandum](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2022/11/28/memorandum-on-promoting-accountability-for-conflict-related-sexual-violence/) on November 28, 2022 that directs the U.S. government to strengthen the exercise of its financial, diplomatic, and legal tools to address CRSV.

** Abdel Rahman Joma’a Barakallah** (Barakallah) is the RSF West Darfur Commander and the head of the RSF’s operations in the region. Barakallah has been directly involved in the planning of the execution of the RSF’s campaign in West Darfur, including playing a key role in the kidnapping and killing of West Darfur Governor Khamis Abbakar. As a Major General and Commander, Barakallah is responsible for the RSF’s activities in the region and the terror unleashed on the local population. Barakallah is also [subject to U.S. visa restrictions](https://www.state.gov/actions-against-senior-rapid-support-forces-commanders-in-sudan/) for his involvement in a gross violation of human rights, namely for the killing of Governor Abbakar.

Barakallah is being sanctioned pursuant to Executive Order 14098 for being a foreign person who is or has been a leader, official, senior executive officer, or member of the board of directors of the RSF, an entity that has, or whose members have, engaged in actions or policies that threaten the peace, security, or stability of Sudan relating to the tenure of such leader, official, senior executive officer, or member of the board of directors.

## SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated person described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons.

In addition, financial institutions and other persons that engage in certain transactions or activities with the sanctioned entities and individuals may expose themselves to sanctions or be subject to an enforcement action. The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any designated person, or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the SDN List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to [OFAC’s Frequently Asked Question 897 here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/897). [For detailed information on the process to submit a request for removal from an OFAC sanctions list, please click here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[Click here for more information on the individual designated today.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20241112)

