---
title: Treasury Targets Organization with Ties to Violent Actors in the West Bank
date: 2024-11-18T10:30:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2715
---
WASHINGTON — Today, the Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is sanctioning **Amana the Settlement Movement of Gush Emunim Central Cooperative Association Ltd** (** Amana**), a settlement development organization that is involved with U.S.-sanctioned individuals and outposts that perpetrate violence in the West Bank, and its subsidiary** Binyanei Bar Amana Ltd**. This action, taken pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 14115, is part of an ongoing multilateral approach by the United States and its partners to hold accountable those who are threatening the peace, security, and stability of the West Bank. Amana has also been sanctioned by the United Kingdom and Canada.

“The United States, along with our allies and partners, remains committed to holding accountable those who seek to facilitate these destabilizing activities, which threaten the stability of the West Bank, Israel, and the wider region,” said Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo.

Concurrently, the Department of State is designating three individuals and one entity under E.O. 14115. For more information on these targets, please see the Department of State press release at this link.

The United States has consistently opposed violence in the West Bank, as well as other acts that unduly restrict civilians’ access to essential services and basic necessities and risk further escalating tensions and expanding the conflict in the region. As noted in FinCEN’s February 1, 2024 [Alert](https://www.fincen.gov/news/news-releases/fincen-issues-alert-israeli-extremist-settler-violence-against-palestinians-west) and July 11, 2024 [Supplemental Alert](https://www.fincen.gov/news/news-releases/fincen-issues-supplemental-alert-israeli-extremist-violence-west-bank), Treasury remains concerned by reports of escalating violence in the West Bank and encourages continued reporting by financial institutions of suspicious activity potentially related to the financing of these violent acts.

## MAJOR SETTLEMENT ORGANIZATION IN WEST BANK

**Amana** is a key part of the Israeli extremist settlement movement and maintains ties to various persons previously sanctioned by the U.S. government and its partners for perpetrating violence in the West Bank. For example, Amana provided a loan to Israeli settler Isaschar Manne, and served as a partner in the formation of Meitarim Farm. The U.S. Department of State sanctioned Isaschar Manne and Meitarim Farm [on July 11, 2024](https://www.state.gov/designation-of-individuals-and-entities-contributing-to-violence-and-instability-in-the-west-bank/) pursuant to E.O. 14115. The settlers and farms that Amana supports play a key role in developing settlements in the West Bank, from which in turn settlers commit violence. More broadly, Amana strategically uses farming outposts, which it supports through financing, loans, and building infrastructure, to expand settlements and seize land.

OFAC today is also sanctioning Amana’s subsidiary, **Binyanei Bar Amana Ltd** (BBA). BBA is a construction and development company that builds and sells homes in settlements and outposts in the West Bank.

OFAC is sanctioning Amana pursuant to E.O. 14115 for being a foreign person that is responsible for or complicit in, or has directly or indirectly engaged or attempted to engage in, planning, ordering, otherwise directing, or participating in seizure or dispossession of property by private actors, affecting the West Bank. OFAC is sanctioning BBA pursuant to E.O. 14115 for being a foreign person that is owned or controlled by, or has acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Amana.

## SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated persons described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons. U.S. persons must comply with OFAC regulations, including all U.S. citizens and permanent resident aliens regardless of where they are located, all persons within the United States, and all U.S.- incorporated entities and their foreign branches. Non-U.S. persons are also subject to certain OFAC prohibitions. For example, non-U.S. persons are prohibited from causing or conspiring to cause U.S. persons to wittingly or unwittingly violate U.S. sanctions, as well as engaging in conduct that evades U.S. sanctions.

U.S. persons may face civil or criminal penalties for violations of E.O. 14115. OFAC’s [Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-31/part-501/appendix-Appendix%20A%20to%20Part%20501) provide more information regarding OFAC’s enforcement of U.S. sanctions, including the factors that OFAC generally considers when determining an appropriate response to an apparent violation.

Financial institutions and other persons that engage in certain transactions or activities with the sanctioned entities and individuals may expose themselves to sanctions or be subject to an enforcement action. The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any designated person, or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN) List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior.

For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to [OFAC’s Frequently Asked Question 897 here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/897). [For detailed information on the process to submit a request for removal from an OFAC sanctions list, please click here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[Click here for more information on the persons designated today](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20241118).

