---
title: "Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen Ahead of Meeting with Beijing University National School of Development Students"
date: 2024-04-07
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2238
press_release_number: JY2238
---

As Prepared for Delivery
Thank you for welcoming me to your campus today.
It is exciting to be among the bright minds of China’s next generation of economists and policymakers.
As I shared with your professors when I met with them earlier today, I began my career as a professor of economics. Throughout my time in academia, I greatly valued frequent exchanges with my fellow faculty members. And I equally enjoyed teaching and learning from students.
This approach of considering new ideas—and constantly testing my own assumptions—has greatly benefited me as I became a policymaker and government official focused on taking a pragmatic approach to difficult problems. I encourage you to carry that spirit forward as you progress in your own careers.
This is why I came to Peking University today.
Over the past year two years, the United States and China have been focused on strengthening communication, including deepening our understanding of each other’s economic policies. This is key to building a healthy U.S.-China economic relationship that brings benefits to workers and firms in both our countries.
And I’ve deepened my understanding not just through discussions with senior government officials, but through discussions with businesses and academics, such as with your professors earlier, who are leaders in their fields.
And now I get the chance to hear from you and the next generation of Chinese economic leaders that you represent.
I have been told that the National School of Development is one of the best places to study public policy and economics.
I encourage you to make the most of your time here.
And as I tell students at home in the United States, you have a tremendous amount to contribute. You bring fresh new perspectives grounded in your own academic work and life experiences. It’s your ideas that will one day help shape your country’s future.
Thank you again for welcoming me to your campus.
###
