---
title: Treasury Sanctions Gazprombank and Takes Additional Steps to Curtail Russia’s Use of the International Financial System
date: 2024-11-21T10:30:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2725
---
*Treasury imposes sanctions on dozens of Russian banks, securities registrars, and finance officials; OFAC issues alert warning of risks of joining Russia’s System for Transfer of Financial Messages*

WASHINGTON — Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) took another major step in implementing commitments made by G7 leaders to curtail Russia’s use of the international financial system to further its war against Ukraine. OFAC’s action includes the designation of Gazprombank, more than 50 internationally connected Russian banks, more than 40 Russian securities registrars, and 15 Russian finance officials. OFAC is also issuing an alert describing sanctions risks related to Russia’s System for Transfer of Financial Messages (SPFS), which the Kremlin created and uses to evade sanctions.

“Today’s sanctions targeting Russia’s largest remaining non-designated bank, as well as dozens of other financial institutions and officials in Russia, will further diminish and degrade Russia’s war machine. This sweeping action will make it harder for the Kremlin to evade U.S. sanctions and fund and equip its military,” said Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen. “We will continue to take decisive steps against any financial channels Russia uses to support its illegal and unprovoked war in Ukraine.”

## GAZPROMBANK

OFAC is designating **Gazprombank Joint Stock Company** (Gazprombank) alongside its six foreign subsidiaries. Gazprombank is a conduit for Russia to purchase military materiel for its war effort against Ukraine. The Russian government also uses Gazprombank to pay its soldiers, including for combat bonuses, and to compensate the families of Russian soldiers killed fighting Putin’s brutal war against Ukraine. Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom have previously sanctioned Gazprombank.

Luxembourg-based bank **GPB International SA**, Hong Kong-based **GPB Financial Services Hong Kong Limited**, Cyprus-based **GPB Financial Services Limited** and **GPB-DI Holdings Limited**, Switzerland-based **Gazprombank (Switzerland) Ltd**, and South Africa-based **GPB Africa and Middle East Pty Ltd** are wholly owned subsidiaries of Gazprombank.

Gazprombank is being designated pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 14024 for operating or having operated in the financial services sector of the Russian Federation economy. GPB International SA, GPB Financial Services Hong Kong Limited, GPB Financial Services Limited, GPB-DI Holdings Limited, Gazprombank (Switzerland) Ltd, and GPB Africa and Middle East Pty Ltd are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for being owned or controlled by, or for having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Gazprombank. All entities owned 50 percent or more, directly or indirectly, by Gazprombank or the six designated Gazprombank subsidiaries, are subject to blocking, even if not identified by OFAC.

Concurrently with this action, OFAC is issuing two new general licenses (GL) authorizing U.S. persons to wind down transactions involving Gazprombank, among other financial institutions, and to take the necessary steps to divest from debt or equity issued by Gazprombank. OFAC is also amending Russia-related GL 53 to ensure that diplomatic banking activities involving Gazprombank are not disrupted. OFAC continues to maintain a [variety of authorizations](https://ofac.treasury.gov/selected-general-licenses-issued-ofac), including GLs authorizing transactions related to agricultural commodities, medicine, medical devices, certain transactions in support of non-governmental organizations, the official business of third-country diplomatic missions located in the Russian Federation, and certain transactions and official business of certain international organizations and entities.

## SYSTEM FOR TRANSFER OF FINANCIAL MESSAGES

OFAC is also [issuing an alert](https://ofac.treasury.gov/media/933656/download?inline) underscoring the sanctions risk for foreign financial institutions that join Russia’s System for Transfer of Financial Messages (commonly known by its Russian acronym, SPFS, short for *Sistema Peredachi Finansovykh Soobshcheniy*). SPFS is part of the [financial services sector](https://ofac.treasury.gov/media/918726/download?inline) of the Russian Federation economy because of its role facilitating communication between financial institutions engaged in Russia’s financial system. This means that any foreign financial institution that joins or has already joined SPFS may be designated for operating or having operated in the financial services sector of the Russian Federation economy pursuant to E.O. 14024. Russia has used and promoted SPFS, designed as an alternative to Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT) network, to maintain international financial connectivity, evade sanctions, and fund its war effort. OFAC views joining SPFS after publication of this alert as a red flag and is prepared to more aggressively target foreign financial institutions that take such action. OFAC also urges stakeholders to review their exposure to institutions that have joined SPFS, as such banks may be conduits for Russian sanctions evasion.

## DOZENS OF RUSSIAN BANKS

Further curtailing Russia’s connections to the international financial system, OFAC is designating more than 50 small-to-medium Russian banks to prevent Russia from abusing the international financial system to pay for the technology and equipment it needs to sustain its illegal and unjust war against Ukraine. Foreign financial institutions that maintain correspondent relationships with these banks should be aware that continuing to do so entails significant sanctions risk.

For more information about these targets, please see [Annex 1] below.

## RUSSIAN SECURITIES REGISTRARS

OFAC is aware that Russia has attempted to evade or avoid OFAC sanctions on the [National Settlement Depository](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy2404) by requiring, via Presidential Decree 840, the transfer of certain securities to local Russian securities registrars. Today, OFAC is designating more than 40 such registrars.  OFAC has also updated [FAQ 1197](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/1197) to provide further guidance on securities held at or otherwise involving these registrars.

For more information about these targets, please see [Annex 2] below.

**CBR OFFICIALS** In September 2022, OFAC designated [Central Bank of the Russian Federation](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0612)(CBR) Governor [Elvira Naibullina](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0981) and First Deputy Governor [Olga Skorobogatova](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0981). At the time, Treasury noted that Russia’s financial technocrats have, directly and indirectly, supported the Kremlin’s unprovoked war against Ukraine. Today, OFAC is designating 11 additional CBR officials, including those involved in maintaining Russia’s international financial connectivity or promoting alternate financial pathways that Russia can exploit to pay for much-needed equipment and technology.

For more information about these targets, please see [Annex 3] below.

## VTB SHANGHAI AND SBERBANK NEW DELHI STAFF

Today’s action also includes designations of key Russian staff members at U.S.-designated [VTB Bank Public Joint Stock Company](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0608)’s branch in Shanghai, China (VTB Shanghai) and U.S.-designated [Public Joint Stock Company Sberbank of Russia](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0705)’s branch in New Delhi, India (Sberbank New Delhi).

The following Russian nationals are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the financial services sector of the Russian Federation economy:

**Andrei Anisimov** is Sberbank New Delhi’s Deputy Managing Director. **Elena Fedkina** is a VTB Shanghai Relationship Manager. **Ilya Lishenko** is VTB Shanghai’s Senior Relationship Manager. **Roman Logov** is VTB Shanghai’s Deputy General Manager.

Since February 2022, OFAC has designated dozens of Russia-based staff at Russian banks and continues to investigate Russian and third-country nationals working at foreign branches, representative offices, and subsidiaries of Russian banks for designation pursuant to E.O. 14024.

~ ~ ~ ~ ~

ANNEX 1: DOZENS OF RUSSIAN BANKS

The following Russia-based financial institutions and individual are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the financial services sector of the Russian Federation economy:

- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Bank Agroros** is a bank headquartered in Saratov, Russia.
- **Bank Iturup LLC** is a bank headquartered in Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, Russia.
- **BBR Bank Joint Stock Company** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **BCS Bank AO** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Bratsky Narodny Bank JSC** is a bank headquartered in Bratsk, Russia.
- **Centrocredit Bank** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Commercial Bank Energotransbank Joint Stock Company** is a bank headquartered in Kaliningrad, Russia.
- **Commercial Bank Khlynov Joint Stock Company** is a bank headquartered in Kirov, Russia.
- **Commercial Bank Kremlyovskiy** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Commercial Joint Stock Bank Viking** is a bank headquartered in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
- **Corporate Finance Bank LLC** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Evrofinance Mosnarbank** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia. [Evrofinance Mosnarbank](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm622) was previously designated pursuant to E.O. 13850.
- **Fora Bank Joint Stock Commercial Bank** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Garant Invest Bank Joint Stock** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Interstate Bank** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Commercial Bank National Reserve Bank Joint Stock Company** (NRB)is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia. **Daniel Haindl** (Haindl) is the Senior Vice President of NRB. In his role at NRB, Haindl has been involved in a sanctions evasion scheme.
- **Joint Stock Commercial Bank Slavia Joint Stock Company** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Commercial Mortgage Bank Akibank Public Joint Stock Company** is a bank headquartered in Naberezhnye Chelny, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Auto Finance Bank** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Bank Accept** is a bank headquartered in Novosibirsk, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Bank Dom RF** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Bank Finservice** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Bank United Capital** is a bank headquartered in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Coalmetbank** is a bank headquartered in Chelyabinsk, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Commercial Bank Ural FD** is a bank headquartered in Perm, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Guta Bank** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company NS Bank** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Public Trust Bank** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Royal Credit Bank** is a bank headquartered in Vladivostok, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Severgazbank** is a bank headquartered in Vologda, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Investment Commercial Bank Eniseisk United Bank** is a bank headquartered in Krasnoyarsk, Russia.
- **JSC Exi Bank** is a bank headquartered in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
- **JSCB Energobank** is a bank headquartered in Kazan, Russia.
- **Kamsky Commercial Bank** is a bank headquartered in Naberezhnye Chelny, Russia.
- **Limited Liability Company Bank Orange** is a bank headquartered in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
- **Limited Liability Company Bank Round** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Limited Liability Company Krona Bank** is a bank headquartered in Irkutsk, Russia.
- **MB Bank** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.MB Bank, also known as Mir Business Bank, is the Russia-based wholly-owned subsidiary of Iran’s Bank Melli Iran. MB Bank was [previously](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm541)[designated](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm553) previously designated pursuant to E.O. 13224 and E.O. 13582.
- **National Standard Bank Joint Stock Company** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **New Moscow Bank** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **NK Bank Joint Stock Company** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Primorsky Territorial Commercial Bank Society with Limited Liability** is a bank headquartered in Vladivostok, Russia.
- **Public Joint Stock Commercial Bank Derzhava** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Public Joint Stock Company Bank Alexandrovsky** is a bank headquartered in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
- **Public Joint Stock Company Bank Sinara** is a bank headquartered in Yekaterinburg, Russia.
- **Public Joint Stock Company Finstar Bank** is a bank headquartered in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
- **Public Joint Stock Company Metkombank** is a bank headquartered in Kamensk-Uralskiy, Russia.
- **Public Joint Stock Company National Bank Trust** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Public Joint Stock Social Commercial Bank of Primorye Primsotsbank** is a bank headquartered in Vladivostok, Russia.
- **Rossita Bank** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Russian Public Joint Stock Commercial Roads Bank** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.
- **Russian Universal Bank** is a bank located in Moscow, Russia.
- **Vitabank PJSC** is a bank headquartered in Podolsk, Russia.
- **Waybank JSC** is a bank headquartered in Moscow, Russia.

ANNEX 2: RUSSIAN SECURITIES REGISTRARS

The following Russia-based financial institutions function as registrars and are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the financial services sector of the Russian Federation economy:

- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Agentstvo Regionalnyi Nezavisimyi Registrator** is a registrar based in Tula, Russia, and Lipetsk, Russia.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Mezhregionalnyi Registratorskii Tsentr** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Natsionalnaya Spetsializirovannaya Finansovaya Kompaniya** is a registrar based in Novosibirsk, Russia.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Nezavisimaya Registratorskaya Kompaniya R.O.S.T.** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Professionalnyi Registratsionnyi Tsentr** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Registrator Kapital** is a registrar based in Yekaterinburg, Russia.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Spetsializirovannyi Registrator Kompas** is a registrar based in Novokuznetsk, Russia.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Surgutinvestneft** is a registrar based in Surgut, Russia.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Vedenie Reestrov Kompanii** is a registrar based in Yekaterinburg, Russia.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Independent Specialized Depository** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **AO Reestr** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Registratsionnaya Kompaniya Tsentr Invest** is a registrar based in Irkutsk, Russia, and Moscow, Russia.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Depozitarnaya Kompaniya Region** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Evroaziatskii Registrator** is a registrar based in Kazan, Russia.
- **AO Spetsializirovannyi Depozitarii Infinitum** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Aktiv** is a registrar based in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Industria Reestr** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company RDC Paritet** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Registrator Intraco** is a registrar based in Perm, Russia.
- **Joint Stock Company Registry Society Status** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **JSC DRAGA** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia, and Saint Petersburg, Russia.
- **JSC Republican Specialregistrar Yakut Fund Center** is a registrar based in Yakutsk, Russia.
- **JSC RT Registrar** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **JSC Service Reestr** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **JSC Noviy Registrator** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Korporativnaya Registratorskaya Kompaniya** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Limited Liability Company Depositary and Corporate Technologies** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Limited Liability Company Special Depository Partner** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Limited Liability Company Specialized Depository Company Garant** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Moskovskii Fondovyi Tsentr** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **National Custodial Company Stock Closed Corporation** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Obshchestvo S Ogranichennoy Otvetsvennostyu Oboronregistr** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **OOO Partner** is a registrar based in Cherepovets, Russia.
- **OOO Reestr RN** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **OOO Registrator Garant** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Registrator KRTS** is a registrar based in Krasnodar, Russia.
- **Spetsializirovannyi Depozitarii Depo Plaza** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.
- **Spetsializirovannyi Registrator Rekom** is a registrar based in Staryy Oskol, Russia.
- **Tsentr Ucheta i Registratsii** is a registrar based in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
- **Yuzhno Regionalnyi Registrator** is a registrar based in Rostov-na-Donu, Russia.
- **Zakrytoe Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Pervyi Spetsializirovannyi Depozitarii** is a registrar based in Moscow, Russia.

ANNEX 3: CBR OFFICIALS

The following Russian nationals are officials at the [Central Bank of the Russian Federation](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0612)(CBR), which is subject to Directives 1 and 4 of E.O. 14024, and are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the financial services sector of the Russian Federation economy:

- **Alla Bakina** (Bakina) is the Director of the National Payment System Department of the CBR and is responsible for modernizing CBR payment systems. Bakina is involved in expanding the reach of Russia’s System for Transfer of Financial Messages (SPFS) and Faster Payments System (SBP).
- **Vladimir Chistyukhin** has been a First Deputy Governor of the CBR since 2022 and a Member of the Board of Directors of the CBR since 2023.
- **Elizaveta Danilova** is Director of the Financial Stability Department at the CBR and has been a Member of the Board of Directors of the CBR since 2023.
- **Gulnara Khaidarshina** is the Director of the Department for Cooperation with International Organizations at the CBR.
- **Mikhail Anatolyevich Kovrigin** is the Director of the International Settlements Department at the CBR.
- **Ekaterina Lozgacheva** has been the Director of the Financial Market Strategy Department of the CBR since 2023 and previously served in other positions at the CBR dating back to 2011.
- **Alexandr Morozov** has been the Director of the Research and Forecasting Department at the CBR since 2015.
- **Olga Vasilyevna Polyakova** has been a Deputy Governor of the CBR since 2016 and a Member of the Board of Directors of the CBR since 2021.
- **Kirill Pronin** (Pronin) is the Director of the Financial Market Infrastructure at the CBR. Pronin was previously Director of the CBR’s Department of Financial Technologies.
- **Bogdan Shablya** is head of the CBR’s Financial Monitoring and Currency Control Department and has worked at the CBR for more than 25 years.
- **Dmitry Tulin** is a First Deputy Governor of the CBR and has been a Member of the Board of Directors of the CBR since 2020.

## SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the persons above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. All transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or blocked persons are prohibited unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt. These prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any blocked person and the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person. Non-U.S. persons are also prohibited from causing or conspiring to cause U.S. persons to wittingly or unwittingly violate U.S. sanctions, as well as from engaging in conduct that evades U.S. sanctions. OFAC’s [Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines](https://ofac.treasury.gov/media/7566/download?inline) provide more information regarding OFAC’s enforcement of U.S. sanctions, including the factors that OFAC generally considers when determining an appropriate response to an apparent violation.

In addition, foreign financial institutions that conduct or facilitate significant transactions or provide any service involving Russia’s military-industrial base run the risk of being sanctioned by OFAC. For additional guidance, please see the [updated OFAC advisory](https://ofac.treasury.gov/media/932436/download?inline), “Updated Guidance for Foreign Financial Institutions on OFAC Sanctions Authorities Targeting Support to Russia’s Military-Industrial Base,” as well as OFAC Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)[1146-1157](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/search?field_faq_number%5bmin%5d=1146&field_faq_number%5bmax%5d=1157).

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the SDN List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to [OFAC’s Frequently Asked Question 897 here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/897). [For detailed information on the process to submit a request for removal from an OFAC sanctions list, please click here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

Any persons included on the SDN List pursuant to E.O. 14024 may be subject to additional export restrictions administered by the Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS).

[For identifying information on the individuals and entities sanctioned today, click here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20241121).

