---
title: Treasury Sanctions Terrorist Viv Ansanm Affiliates
date: 2025-10-17T09:52:12-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0282
url: /news/press-releases/sb0282
---
**WASHINGTON**– Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is sanctioning **Dimitri Herard** (**Herard**) for his support to the Haitian gang coalition, **Viv Ansanm**.  Also designated today is **Kempes Sanon** (**Sanon**), leader of the Bel Air gang, one of the constituent gangs in the Viv Ansanm alliance.  Viv Ansanm contributes to the violence and instability within Haiti.

“Today’s action underscores the critical role of gang leaders and facilitators like Herard and Sanon, whose support enables Viv Ansanm’s campaign of violence, extortion, and terrorism in Haiti,” said **Director of the Office of Foreign Assets Control Bradley T. Smith**.  “The United States is committed to holding accountable the violent terrorist gangs that endanger the Haitian people.”

Viv Ansanm was designated by the U.S. Department of State as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) and Foreign Terrorist Organization on [May 2, 2025](https://www.state.gov/designation-of-viv-ansanm-and-gran-grif/).  OFAC is taking today’s action pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, as amended, which targets terrorist groups, their supporters, and those who aid acts of terrorism.

## TARGETING VIOLENT GANG FACILITATORS

**Herard** is a former Haitian police officer who was connected to, and later imprisoned by Haitian authorities for, the assassination of former President Jovenel Moïse in 2021. Since his escape from prison in 2024, Herard has colluded with the Viv Ansanm alliance and provided support to many of the gang leaders with training and firearms.  Herard’s support directly backs the Viv Ansanm’s coordinated attacks against State institutions. **Sanon** is the leader of the Bel Air gang, one of the constituent gangs in the Viv Ansanm alliance, and has played a significant role in the consolidation of power of Viv Ansanm. Sanon and his gang have been involved in indiscriminate civilian killings, extortion, illicit taxation, and kidnappings in Haiti.

Herard and Sanon are being sanctioned pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for having materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services to or in support of Viv Ansanm, an entity whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended.

## SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated or blocked persons described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC.  In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of blocked persons.

Violations of U.S. sanctions may result in the imposition of civil or criminal penalties on U.S. and foreign persons.  OFAC may impose civil penalties for sanctions violations on a strict liability basis. [OFAC’s Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-31/subtitle-B/chapter-V/part-501/appendix-Appendix%20A%20to%20Part%20501) provide more information regarding OFAC’s enforcement of U.S. economic sanctions. In addition, financial institutions and other persons may risk exposure to sanctions for engaging in certain transactions or activities involving designated or otherwise blocked persons.  The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any designated or blocked person, or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

Furthermore, engaging in certain transactions involving the persons designated today may risk the imposition of secondary sanctions on participating foreign financial institutions.  OFAC can prohibit or impose strict conditions on opening or maintaining, in the United States, a correspondent account or a payable-through account of a foreign financial institution that knowingly conducts or facilitates any significant transaction on behalf of a person who is designated pursuant to the relevant authority.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List), but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law.  The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior.  For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, or to submit a request, please refer to OFAC’s guidance on [Filing a Petition for Removal from an OFAC List](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[Click here for more information on the persons designated today](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20251016).

