---
title: Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence John K. Hurley to Travel to Israel, UAE, Türkiye, and Lebanon
date: 2025-10-31
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0299
url: /news/press-releases/sb0299
---
**WASHINGTON** – Today, Treasury Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence John K. Hurley will travel to Europe and Middle East. Under Secretary Hurley’s trip is focused on working with a number of key partners to implement President Trump’s maximum pressure campaign against Iran and increase safeguards to further restrict terrorist groups from gaining access to the global financial system.  Under Secretary Hurley will work with partners to effectively implement and enforce United Nations sanctions and measures that were reimposed as a result of Iran’s failure to meet its international obligations.

“President Trump has made clear that Iran’s destabilizing and terrorist activities must be met with sustained and coordinated pressure,” said **Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence John K. Hurley**. “I look forward to meeting with our partners to coordinate our efforts to deny Tehran and its proxies the financial access they rely on to evade international sanctions, fund violence, and undermine stability in the region."**Under Secretary Hurley has engagements planned in Israel, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Türkiye, and Lebanon.**

- In Israel, Under Secretary Hurley will discuss ways in which both countries can work together to further President Trump’s maximum pressure campaign on Iran, particularly against Iran’s regional proxies.
- In the UAE, Under Secretary Hurley will emphasize the importance of a strong U.S.-UAE partnership to further President Trump’s maximum pressure campaign on Iran.and to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism. Under Secretary Hurley will highlight how the continued strengthening and enforcement of robust illicit finance controls support the deepening U.S.-UAE economic relationship and reinforce the UAE’s position as a global financial center for the next century.
- In Türkiye, Under Secretary Hurley will discuss how the United States and Türkiye can work together to stop regional malign influences and sanctions evasion. Under Secretary Hurley will also highlight the importance of robust illicit finance controls implemented with effective enforcement.

