---
title: Treasury Department Announces Gary Grippo to Serve as Acting Fiscal Assistant Secretary
date: 2025-07-10T10:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0192
url: /news/press-releases/sb0192
---
WASHINGTON – U.S. Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Michael Faulkender issued the following the announcement that Gary Grippo will serve as Acting Fiscal Assistant Secretary:

“Throughout his career at Treasury, Gary has been a steadfast public servant. He has overseen numerous divisions of the Department and developed critical policies and systems for public monies—both in the United States and abroad. I was honored to work with Gary during the first Trump Administration, where he exemplified the professionalism of the best career staff in Washington. As we continue to execute President Trump’s agenda to bring about a new Golden Age for America, we are privileged to have Gary oversee the office.”

Mr. Grippo has worked his entire career in the Treasury Department. Previously, Grippo served as the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Public Finance, in the Office of Financial Markets. He has also served as the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fiscal Operations and Policy, where he developed policy for Federal cash management, disbursing, financial asset management, and debt financing operations. Earlier in his career, Mr. Grippo was the Assistant Commissioner at the Financial Management Service, a former bureau of the Treasury Department that was consolidated into the current Bureau of the Fiscal Service, where he managed the Government’s revenue collection systems and depositary banking relationships.

