---
title: U.S. Treasury Department Announces Major Progress in IT Modernization Initiatives
date: 2025-09-22
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0260
url: /news/press-releases/sb0260
---
The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced significant progress across its IT modernization agenda within the IRS, underscoring its commitment to improving taxpayer services, enhancing cybersecurity, strengthening compliance, and filing season operations. To enable delivery of these objectives, Treasury has entered into a series of Blanket Purchase Agreements (BPAs) with leading technology providers. All commercial tools below are already FedRAMPed.

 

### Key Initiatives and Partnerships

- **Taxpayer Services and Online Accounts**: To modernize taxpayer-facing services, Treasury has extended its contract with** Salesforce**. This agreement will support improvements to individual and business online accounts, the Tax Pro Online Account, and authenticated online services, including customer contact centers.
- ** Tax Processing**: Treasury continues to advance its** Zero Paper Initiative**, reducing paper-based filings and accelerating digital adoption. To support this work, Treasury has executed contracts with** Iron Mountain**and three additional industry partners: GovCIO, VASTEC, and 22nd Century.
- ** Unified API Layer and Data Integrity**: To continue improving data integrity and technical infrastructure, Treasury has awarded a contract to** Palantir**. This partnership will enable a common API layer that supports developer platforms, workflow automation, and data analytics.  This work supports federal employees, increasing efficiency for their professional duties.

### Next Steps

The Treasury Department will continue to engage with industry partners and leverage modern technology solutions to achieve its modernization goals. Updates will be provided as additional contracts are awarded and milestones achieved.

 

###
