---
title: Treasury Sanctions Fugitive Tren de Aragua Leader
date: 2025-06-24
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0178
url: /news/press-releases/sb0178
---
**WASHINGTON –** Today, the Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) sanctioned **Giovanni Vicente Mosquera Serrano **(Mosquera Serrano), a fugitive leader of Tren de Aragua (TdA) who is involved in the organization’s drug trafficking and financial operations.  TdA is a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) of Venezuelan origin that has launched a campaign of terror throughout the Western Hemisphere, including in the United States, and continues to expand.  TdA is involved in illicit drug trade, human smuggling and trafficking, extortion, sexual exploitation of women and children, and money laundering, among other criminal activities.

“TdA remains focused on terrorizing our communities and facilitating the flow of illicit narcotics into our country, relying on key leaders like Mosquera Serrano to finance and oversee their violent operations,” said **Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent.**“Treasury, in close coordination with our partners in U.S. law enforcement, will continue to use all available tools to disrupt the group’s criminal enterprise and Make America Safe Again.”

Today’s action is the result of collaboration with Treasury’s government counterparts.  It complements the addition of Mosquera Serrano to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)’s Ten Most Wanted list.  In addition, the DOJ announced the unsealing of an indictment that charges Mosquera Serrano with drug trafficking and terrorism-related criminal activity.  Finally, the Department of State, through the Transnational Organized Crime Rewards Program managed by the Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, is offering a reward of up to [$3 million](https://www.state.gov/reward-for-information-giovanny-san-vicente/) for information leading to the arrest and/or conviction of Mosquera Serrano.

## SENIOR LEADER OF TREN DE ARAGUA


* Mosquera Serrano was today announced as an FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitive.*

 

On [February 20, 2025](https://www.state.gov/designation-of-international-cartels/), the U.S. Department of State identified Tren de Aragua as an FTO and as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT).  OFAC had previously [sanctioned](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy2459) Tren de Aragua pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13581, as amended, as a significant Transnational Criminal Organization on July 11, 2024.

**Giovanni Vicente Mosquera Serrano**(Mosquera Serrano) is a notorious member of Tren de Aragua who has overseen narcotics trafficking efforts and murders on behalf of the gang in Colombia.  Mosquera Serrano has additionally been responsible for extortion efforts on Tren de Aragua’s behalf and has managed the financial proceeds of the gang’s criminal activities.

Today, OFAC is sanctioning Mosquera Serrano pursuant to E.O. 13581, as amended, and pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Tren de Aragua.  E.O. 13224, as amended, targets terrorist groups and their supporters.

## SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated person described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons is blocked and must be reported to OFAC.  In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked.  Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of blocked persons.

Violations of U.S. sanctions may result in the imposition of civil or criminal penalties on U.S. and foreign persons.  OFAC may impose civil penalties for sanctions violations on a strict liability basis. [OFAC’s Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-31/subtitle-B/chapter-V/part-501/appendix-Appendix%20A%20to%20Part%20501) provide more information regarding OFAC’s enforcement of U.S. economic sanctions. In addition, financial institutions and other persons may risk exposure to sanctions for engaging in certain transactions or activities involving designated or otherwise blocked persons.  The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any designated or blocked person, or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

Furthermore, engaging in certain transactions involving the person designated today may risk the imposition of secondary sanctions on participating foreign financial institutions.  OFAC can prohibit or impose strict conditions on opening or maintaining, in the United States, a correspondent account or a payable-through account of a foreign financial institution that knowingly conducts or facilitates any significant transaction on behalf of a person who is designated pursuant to the relevant authority.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List), but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law.  The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior.  For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, or to submit a request, please refer to OFAC’s guidance on [Filing a Petition for Removal from an OFAC List](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[Click here for more information on the person designated today](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20250624).

