---
title: Treasury’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) Issues Southwest Border Geographic Targeting Order
date: 2025-03-11
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0048
url: /news/press-releases/sb0048
---
WASHINGTON – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) issued a Geographic Targeting Order (GTO) to further combat the illicit activities and money laundering of Mexico-based cartels and other criminal actors along the southwest border of the United States. The GTO requires all money services businesses (MSBs) located in 30 ZIP codes across California and Texas near the southwest border to file Currency Transaction Reports (CTRs) with FinCEN at a $200 threshold, in connection with cash transactions.

“Today’s issuance of this GTO underscores our deep concern with the significant risk to the U.S. financial system of the cartels, drug traffickers, and other criminal actors along the Southwest border,” said Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent. “As part of a whole-of-government approach to combatting the threat, Treasury remains focused on leveraging all our available tools and authorities to better identify and counter these criminal activities.”

Combatting drug cartels and stopping the flow of deadly drugs into the United States is one of the Administration’s highest priorities. In January, President Donald J. Trump issued an Executive Order creating a process by which certain cartels and other organizations would be designated as Foreign Terrorist Organizations (FTOs) and/or Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs). Accordingly, in February, the U.S. Departments of the Treasury and State designated eight organizations, including six major Mexico-based drug cartels, as FTOs and SDGTs. These designations will allow the United States to take further steps to deny individuals and entities associated with these groups access to the U.S. financial system.

The terms of the GTO are effective beginning 30 days after the date on which the order is published in the Federal Register. The terms are effective for 179 days thereafter.

The order covers the following ZIP codes across seven counties in California and Texas:

- Imperial County, California: 92231, 92249, 92281, 92283
- San Diego County, California: 91910, 92101, 92113, 92117, 92126, 92154, 92173
- Cameron County, Texas: 78520, 78521
- El Paso County, Texas: 79901, 79902, 79903, 79905, 79907, 79935
- Hidalgo County, Texas: 78503, 78557, 78572, 78577, 78596
- Maverick County, Texas: 78852
- Webb County, Texas: 78040, 78041, 78043, 78045, 78046

FinCEN appreciates the assistance of MSBs in defending the United States from Mexico-based cartels, especially those trafficking fentanyl, and in otherwise protecting the U.S. financial system.

Any questions about the GTO should be directed to[www.fincen.gov/contact](https://www.fincen.gov/contact).

[A copy of the GTO is available here](https://www.fincen.gov/sites/default/files/shared/SWB-MSB-GTO-Order-FINAL508.pdf).

###
