---
title: Treasury Sanctions Top Leaders of Tren de Aragua
date: 2025-07-17
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0195
url: /news/press-releases/sb0195
---
**WASHINGTON**— Today, the Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) sanctioned **Hector Rusthenford Guerrero Flores **(a.k.a. “Niño Guerrero”)—the head of Tren de Aragua—and five other key Tren de Aragua leaders and affiliates. Tren de Aragua is a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) that originated in Venezuela and continues to expand.  Niño Guerrero has grown Tren de Aragua from a prison gang involved in extortion and bribery to an influential organization that threatens public safety throughout the Western Hemisphere.  Tren de Aragua is involved in the illicit drug trade, human smuggling and trafficking, extortion, sexual exploitation of women and children, and money laundering, among other criminal activities.

“Today’s action highlights the critical role of leaders like Niño Guerrero and his lieutenants in Tren de Aragua’s efforts to increase its destabilizing influence throughout the region,” said **Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent**.  “The Trump Administration will not allow Tren de Aragua to continue to terrorize our communities and harm innocent Americans.  In line with President Trump’s mandate to Make America Safe Again, Treasury remains dedicated to dismantling Tren de Aragua and disrupting the group’s campaign of violence.”

### DERAILING TREN DE ARAGUA LEADERSHIP

On [February 20, 2025](https://www.state.gov/designation-of-international-cartels/), the Department of State designated Tren de Aragua as an FTO and Specially Designated Global Terrorist.  Treasury previously sanctioned Tren de Aragua as a significant transnational criminal organization on [July 11, 2024](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy2459).  On [June 24, 2025](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sb0178), OFAC sanctioned Giovanni Vicente Mosquera Serrano, another senior leader of Tren de Aragua.  Today, OFAC is sanctioning the following leaders and key affiliates of Tren de Aragua.

**Hector Rusthenford Guerrero Flores **(a.k.a. “Niño Guerrero”) is the notorious head of Tren de Aragua.  Niño Guerrero has been involved in criminal activities for over two decades and has expanded Tren de Aragua from a prison gang involved in extortion and bribery to an organization with growing influence throughout the Western Hemisphere.  On [July 11, 2024](https://www.state.gov/reward-for-information-hector-rusthenford-guerrero-flores), the State Department issued a reward for up to $5 million for information leading to the arrest and/or conviction of Niño Guerrero.

One of Niño Guerrero’s notorious co-founders and a close lieutenant, **Yohan Jose Romero **(a.k.a. “Johan Petrica”), is responsible for the group’s illegal mining efforts in Venezuela. Additionally, Johan Petrica provides Tren de Aragua with military-grade weapons used to control the streets of Venezuela and fight against Colombian guerrillas.  On [July 11, 2024](https://www.state.gov/reward-for-information-yohan-jose-romero/), the State Department issued a reward for up to $4 million for information leading to the arrest and/or conviction of Johan Petrica.

**Josue Angel Santana Pena**(a.k.a. “Santanita”) has also been involved in Tren de Aragua dating back to the organization’s origins as a prison gang.  Santanita was reportedly imprisoned with Niño Guerrero in Tocoron Prison and previously helped direct Tren de Aragua from within the prison. Santanita is alleged to be involved in homicide, extortion, bombings, terrorism, and theft.

**Wilmer Jose Perez Castillo **(a.k.a. “Wilmer Guayabal”)** **is known to be a lieutenant of Niño Guerrero and the leader of a Tren de Aragua cell involved in drug trafficking and bribe collection in Venezuela.  Wilmer Guayabal has also executed the murders of a policeman, a Venezuelan military official, and Venezuelan intelligence officials on behalf of Tren de Aragua.

Niño Guerrero’s wife, **Wendy Marbelys Rios Gomez**, is linked to criminal activities such as money laundering, terrorism, and terrorist financing and is believed to have enriched herself through profits maintained in connection to criminal activities of Tren de Aragua.

 

**Felix Anner Castillo Rondon **(a.k.a. “Pure Arnel”) is the leader of a Tren de Aragua cell known as “Los Gallegos” that has operated in Chile.  Los Gallegos is implicated in homicides, human trafficking, sexual exploitation of women, narcotics trafficking, and money laundering.

Today, OFAC is sanctioning Hector Rusthenford Guerrero Flores, Yohan Jose Romero, Wilmer Jose Perez Castillo, Wendy Marbelys Rios Gomez, and Felix Anner Castillo Rondon pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13581, as amended, and pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Tren de Aragua.

Today’s action is the result of coordination with U.S. government counterparts, including the Department of Justice’s Joint Task Force Vulcan.

### SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated persons described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons is blocked and must be reported to OFAC.  In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked.  Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of blocked persons.

Violations of U.S. sanctions may result in the imposition of civil or criminal penalties on U.S. and foreign persons.  OFAC may impose civil penalties for sanctions violations on a strict liability basis. [OFAC’s Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-31/subtitle-B/chapter-V/part-501/appendix-Appendix%20A%20to%20Part%20501) provide more information regarding OFAC’s enforcement of U.S. economic sanctions. In addition, financial institutions and other persons may risk exposure to sanctions for engaging in certain transactions or activities involving designated or otherwise blocked persons. The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any designated or blocked person, or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

Furthermore, engaging in certain transactions involving the persons designated today may risk the imposition of secondary sanctions on participating foreign financial institutions.  OFAC can prohibit or impose strict conditions on opening or maintaining, in the United States, a correspondent account or a payable-through account of a foreign financial institution that knowingly conducts or facilitates any significant transaction on behalf of a person who is designated pursuant to the relevant authority.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List), but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law.  The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior.  For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, or to submit a request, please refer to OFAC’s guidance on [Filing a Petition for Removal from an OFAC List](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[Click here for more information on the persons designated today](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20250717).
