---
title: Treasury Department Announces Frank Bisignano as Chief Executive Officer of the IRS
date: 2025-10-06T08:35:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0271
url: /news/press-releases/sb0271
---
**WASHINGTON** – Today, U.S. Secretary of the Treasury and Acting Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service Scott Bessent announced that Commissioner of the Social Security Administration Frank Bisignano will serve as Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the IRS. In this newly created position, Mr. Bisignano will report directly to Acting Commissioner Bessent, managing the organization and overseeing all day-to-day IRS operations while also continuing to serve in his role as Commissioner of the Social Security Administration.

“Frank is a businessman with an exceptional track record of driving growth and efficiency in the private and now public sector,” said Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent. The IRS and SSA – two of the most public-facing and broadly impactful federal agencies – also share many of the same technological and customer service goals. This makes Mr. Bisignano a natural choice for this role. “Under his leadership at the SSA, he has already made important and substantial progress, and we are pleased that he will bring this expertise to the IRS as we sharpen our focus on collections, privacy, and customer service in order to deliver better outcomes for hardworking Americans.”

Frank J. Bisignano, the 18th Senate-confirmed Commissioner of the U.S. Social Security Administration, is a proven leader with more than four decades of experience guiding some of the world’s largest financial institutions and technology companies through transformation and growth. Prior to leading SSA, Bisignano served as Chairman and CEO of Fiserv, the world’s largest financial services and payment technology company. In 2019, he led the merger of Fiserv and First Data while he was serving as CEO of the latter company. While at J.P. Morgan Chase in the 2000’s, Bisignano was the co-Chief Operating Officer and served as the CEO of its Mortgage Banking unit. He also previously held several roles at Citigroup, including Chief Administrative Officer and CEO of the company’s Global Transaction Services unit.

