---
title: Treasury Increases Pressure on Iran’s Sanctions-Evading Shadow Fleet
date: 2025-12-18
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0341
url: /news/press-releases/sb0341
---
**WASHINGTON**—Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is placing further pressure on the Iranian shadow fleet, which exports Iranian petroleum and petroleum products through deceptive shipping practices.  OFAC is targeting 29 shadow fleet vessels and their respective management firms that have transported hundreds of millions of dollars’ worth of Iranian petroleum products.  Today’s action also targets** Hatem Elsaid Farid Ibrahim Sakr**, an Egyptian businessman whose companies are associated with seven of the 29 shadow fleet vessels included in this action, as well as multiple shipping companies.

“As President Trump has said repeatedly, the United States will not allow Iran to have a nuclear weapon,” said** Treasury Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence John K. Hurley**.  “Treasury will continue to deprive the regime of the petroleum revenue it uses to fund its military and weapons programs.”

### TREASURY is SANCTIONING ADDITIONAL VESSELS IN the shadow fleet

OFAC is taking systematic actions against the shadow fleet that Iran relies on to evade sanctions and transport petroleum to end users in Asia.  Since President Trump resumed office, his Administration has sanctioned more than 180 vessels responsible for shipping Iranian petroleum and petroleum products, driving up costs for Iranian oil exporters and reducing the revenue Iran receives for each barrel of oil sold.

This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13902, which targets Iran’s petroleum and petrochemical sectors.  It continues the robust sanctions campaign targeting Iranian oil sales in support of the President’s[National Security Presidential Memorandum 2](https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/02/national-security-presidential-memorandum-nspm-2/)(NSPM-2), instituting maximum economic pressure on Iran.

 

Today’s action includes vessels used to transport Iranian crude oil and a variety of Iranian petroleum products, including fuel oil, bitumen, naphtha, and condensate.  These vessels are owned and operated by a group of companies that operate out of various jurisdictions and are largely established for the sole purpose of owning and managing their respective vessels.  The following vessels are linked to years of Iranian petroleum shipments, including significant volumes in 2025:

- The Palau-flagged** NEBULA DRIFT **(IMO 9233973) and** AETHER SAIL **(IMO 9277371), and the Panama-flagged** TIDAL RHYTHM **(IMO 9297101) and** VOYAGER HAVEN**(IMO 9271896),** ** all managed and operated by United Arab Emirates (UAE)-based**Phoenix Ship Management FZE**, have transported hundreds of thousands of barrels of Iranian petroleum products in 2025, including condensate, bitumen, and naphtha.
 
- The Palau-flagged** ARIHANT**(IMO 9464156), owned, operated, and managed by Panama-based** Arihant Shipping Inc.**, has transported hundreds of thousands of barrels of Iranian fuel oil and bitumen within the Persian Gulf since July 2025.
 
- The Palau-flagged** KURDOS **(IMO 9236731),** KURDOS II **(IMO 9453729) and** KURDOS III **(IMO 9380570), all owned, operated, and managed by Panama-based** Kurdos Shipping Inc.**, have transported hundreds of thousands of barrels of Iranian fuel oil and bitumen within the Persian Gulf since early 2025.
 
- The Panama-flagged** KASSIA**(IMO 9409986), owned and operated by Marshall Islands-registered** Adonis Shipping Inc**, has transported over two dozen shipments of Iranian petroleum products, including fuel oil, since 2024.
 
- The Cook Islands-flagged** MAJESTY **(IMO 9430715), owned by Marshall Islands-registered** Concord Shipping Inc.**, has transported nearly a dozen shipments of Iranian petroleum products since early 2025.
 
- The Barbados-flagged** FLORA DOLCE **(IMO 9258595), owned and managed by India-based** Rukbat Marine Services Co**, has transported millions of barrels of Iranian fuel oil since April 2025.
 
- The Jamaica-flagged** DIANA**(IMO 9255945), owned and operated by British Virgin Islands-based** Aleah Shipping Inc**, has transported millions of barrels of Iranian fuel oil since May 2025.
 
- The Cook Islands-flagged** J M A**(IMO 9246487), owned and operated by Panama-based** J M A Shipping Inc.**, has transported hundreds of thousands of barrels of Iranian fuel oil since August 2021.
 
- The Cook Islands-flagged** S M A **(IMO 9273002), owned and operated by Panama-based** S M A****Shipping Inc.**, has transported hundreds of thousands of barrels of Iranian bitumen since June 2021.
 
- The Cook Islands-flagged** M K A**(IMO 9269403), owned, operated, and managed by Marshall Islands-registered** M K A Shipping Inc**, has transported hundreds of thousands of barrels of Iranian bitumen, fuel oil, and naphtha since January 2024.** M K A**has previously transported naphtha and gasoil that originated from Russia.** M K A**was previously operated and managed by the sanctioned[Indo Gulf Ship Management LLC](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy2652)while it transported Iranian oil.
 
- The Panama-flagged** AUROURA **(IMO 9262912), owned and operated by India-based** Golden Gate Ship Management**, has transported millions of barrels of Iranian petroleum products, including naphtha and condensate.
 
- The Barbados-flagged** RAMYA **(IMO 9363182), operated and managed by India-based** Darya Shipping Private Limited**, has transported more than a hundred thousand barrels of Iranian petroleum products, including naphtha, since September 2025.
 
- The Panama-flagged** FOSHAN **(IMO 9404572), owned and operated by Marshall Islands-registered** Sinostar Marine Group Limited**, has transported hundreds of thousands of barrels of Iranian fuel oil and lubricants since June 2025.
 
- The Palau-flagged** HEMERA**(IMO 9263954), owned and operated by Marshall Islands-registered** Hemera Lines Inc.**, has transported more than 150,000 barrels of bitumen since February 2025.
 
- The Panama-flagged** NOMIKI **(IMO 9242443), owned and managed by Marshall Islands-registered** Agape Shipping Inc**, has transported millions of barrels of Iranian fuel oil in 2025.
 
- The Cook Islands-flagged** MARUTI**(IMO 9546710), owned and operated by Marshall Islands-registered** Maruti Shipping Inc.**, has transported hundreds of thousands of barrels of Iranian naphtha in 2025.
 
- The unknown-flagged** GOLDEN EAGLE**(IMO 9255684), owned and operated by Liberia-based** Everest Sea Navigation SA**, has transported millions of barrels of Iranian crude oil in 2025.
 

The following companies are being designated pursuant to E.O. 13902 for operating in the petroleum sector of the Iranian economy:

 
- Phoenix Ship Management FZE;
- Arihant Shipping Inc.;
- Kurdos Shipping Inc.;
- Adonis Shipping Inc;
- Concord Shipping Inc.;
- Rukbat Marine Services Co;
- Aleah Shipping Inc;
- J M A Shipping Inc.;
- S M A Shipping Inc.;
- M K A Shipping Inc;
- Golden Gate Ship Management;
- Darya Shipping Private Limited;
- Sinostar Marine Group Limited;
- Hemera Lines Inc.;
- Agape Shipping Inc;
- Maruti Shipping Inc.; and
- Everest Sea Navigation SA
 

The following vessels are being identified as blocked property of the previously identified blocked persons:

 
- NEBULA DRIFT, AETHER SAIL, TIDAL RHYTHM** ** and VOYAGER HAVEN (Phoenix Ship Management FZE);
- ARIHANT (Arihant Shipping Inc.);
- KURDOS, KURDOS II, and KURDOS III (Kurdos Shipping Inc).;
- KASSIA (Adonis Shipping Inc);
- MAJESTY (Concord Shipping Inc.);
- FLORA DOLCE (Rukbat Marine Services Co);
- DIANA (Aleah Shipping Inc);
- J M A (J M A Shipping Inc.);
- S M A (S M A Shipping Inc.);
- M K A (M K A Shipping Inc);
- AUROURA (Golden Gate Ship Management);
- RAMYA (Darya Shipping Private Limited);
- FOSHAN (Sinostar Marine Group Limited);
- HEMERA (Hemera Lines Inc.);
- NOMIKI (Agape Shipping Inc);
- MARUTI (Maruti Shipping Inc.); and
- GOLDEN EAGLE (Everest Sea Navigation SA).
 

### egyptian ENABLER OF IRANIAN PETROLEUM EXPORTS

UAE-based Egyptian shipping businessman**Hatem Elsaid Farid Ibrahim Sakr**(Sakr) owns and operates multiple companies, including UAE-based** Red Sea Ship Management LLC **and** High Seas Petroleum LLC**, formerly known as Petrofleet Energy Trading LLC,** ** that have been responsible for transporting large quantities of Iranian petroleum products in the Persian Gulf region, including in coordination with Iranian Ministry of Defense and Armed Forces Logistics-associated front company[Sahara Thunder](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy2295).  Red Sea Ship Management LLC** ** manages and operates the Palau-flagged products tankers**SKYLIGHT **(IMO 9330020),** KHADIGA **(IMO 9321469), and** INTAN PREMIER **(IMO 9358802), each of which have transported Iranian petroleum products such as naphtha, bitumen, and fuel oil.  The SKYLIGHT, previously known as the AL MOUSTAFA, was acquired by Sakr in June 2023.  Immediately after acquiring the vessel, the SKYLIGHT was used for a ship-to-ship transfer of Iranian condensate in the interest of Sahara Thunder.

Hatem Elsaid Farid Ibrahim Sakr is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13902 for operating in the petroleum sector of the Iranian economy.  Red Sea Ship Management LLC and High Seas Petroleum LLC are being designated pursuant to E.O. 13902 for being owned or controlled by, or having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Hatem Elsaid Farid Ibrahim Sakr.  SKYLIGHT, KHADIGA, and INTAN PREMIER are being identified as blocked property in which Red Sea Ship Management LLC has an interest.

Sakr’s companies transferred management of several vessels to UAE-based** Qatrat Alnada Almasi Ship Management L.L.C **(Qatrat Alnada), including at least three vessels that have transported Iranian petroleum products.  Qatrat Alnada’s vessels, including the Palau-flagged** SEA WISE**(IMO 9224570),** SEAMULL**(IMO 9204776), and** SEA ROCK**(IMO 9140451), have each transported Iranian petroleum products, including naphtha and gasoil, on multiple occasions.  Qatrat Alnada also operates and manages the Palau-flagged tanker** SEA CITRINE VI**(IMO 9207273).  All four vessels have made port calls to Houthi-controlled ports in Yemen.

Qatrat Alnada Almasi Ship Management L.L.C is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13902 for operating in the petroleum sector of the Iranian economy.  SEA WISE, SEAMULL, SEA ROCK, and SEA CITRINE VI** ** are** ** being identified as blocked property in which Qatrat Alnada Almasi Ship Management L.L.C has an interest.

### SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated or blocked persons described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC.  In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked.  Unless authorized by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of blocked persons.

Violations of U.S. sanctions may result in the imposition of civil or criminal penalties on U.S. and foreign persons.  OFAC may impose civil penalties for sanctions violations on a strict liability basis.  OFAC’s[Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-31/subtitle-B/chapter-V/part-501/appendix-Appendix%20A%20to%20Part%20501)provide more information regarding OFAC’s enforcement of U.S. economic sanctions. In addition, financial institutions and other persons may risk exposure to sanctions for engaging in certain transactions or activities involving designated or otherwise blocked persons.  The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any designated or blocked person, or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the SDN List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law.  The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior.  For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, or to submit a request, please refer to OFAC’s guidance on[Filing a Petition for Removal from an OFAC List](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list)

[Click here for more information on the persons designated and any property identified as blocked property today](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20251218).

###
