---
title: FATF Advances Work Combatting Proliferation Financing,  Reaffirms Countermeasures Against Iran
date: 2025-02-21
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0023
url: /news/press-releases/sb0023
---
PARIS – Today, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)—the global standard-setting body for anti-money laundering, countering the financing of terrorism, and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction—concluded a plenary in which representatives from the Department of the Treasury participated.

During the plenary—the second under the Mexican presidency—the FATF discussed ongoing work on evolving proliferation financing and terrorist financing risks, financial inclusion, and standards for domestic and cross-border payments, including agreeing to release draft updates for public consultation.  The FATF also agreed to consult the public on an initiative examining complex proliferation financing and sanctions evasion schemes. Treasury looks forward to engaging with the private sector for public consultation on these topics.

The FATF also endorsed changes to its recommendation to further reaffirm the importance of a risk-based approach to assessing and mitigating money laundering and terrorist financing risks, including ensuring preventive or mitigation measures are commensurate with the risks identified.

Finally, the FATF finalized work to help combat the online sexual exploitation of children, a heinous crime that preys on some of society’s most vulnerable.  The soon-to-be-published report, based upon contributions from nearly 30 countries, analyzes the financial typologies associated with financial sextortion and live-streamed abuse of children.

“The United States welcomes the FATF’s reaffirmation of countermeasures against Iran for the terrorist financing risk emanating from that country, as well as the continued work to strengthen the international financial system against all illicit finance,” said Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent.

[Outcomes of the FATF Plenary, February 21, 2025](https://www.fatf-gafi.org/content/fatf-gafi/en/publications/Fatfgeneral/outcomes-fatf-plenary-february-2025.html)
