---
title: "Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent at the APEC Economic Leaders’ Informal Dialogue"
date: 2025-10-31
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/sb0297
press_release_number: SB0297
---

As prepared for delivery
Thank you, Chairman.
I am honored to be here on behalf of President Trump to join fellow APEC economies in advancing a more connected and resilient region. Our shared prosperity depends on fair and secure trade and investment flows.
Under President Trump’s leadership, the United States is rebalancing its trade relationships to build a stronger foundation for global growth. This ensures that each country operates on fair and reciprocal terms.
A more balanced global system is one that is grounded in transparency, market access, and fair competition, and also one that supports growth across all APEC economies.
We are taking decisive steps to secure and diversify global supply chains. From critical minerals and magnets to semiconductors and energy, the United States is investing with its trading partners to build resilient production networks that reduce dependence on vulnerable sectors. These efforts make supply chains more secure and reliable for all.
Early in our Administration, President Trump recognized the emerging global crises that threatened economic stability. Exercising his authority under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (or IEEPA), President Trump acted swiftly and decisively to confront these challenges.
The United States is working to balance trade, curtail the flow of illicit fentanyl and precursors, and secure access to rare earth elements that are essential for modern supply chains. These actions, taken under extraordinary circumstances, work to safeguard global economic security.
Additionally, the United States is strengthening public-private collaboration to unlock investment and innovation at scale. Through our work with APEC economies, many of whom are here today, we are seeing record levels of capital being invested into advanced manufacturing and technology sectors.
You are among the largest and fastest-growing sources of investment in the United States, which reflects your deep confidence in America’s economic strength and demonstrates how American markets are powering mutual growth across the Pacific.
President Trump has made clear that economic security is national security. When supply chains are strong, markets are efficient, and competition is fair, every economy benefits.
The United States stands ready to work with APEC partners to promote resilience, prosperity, and stability across the Pacific and beyond.
Thank you.
