---
title: "Joint Statement from U.S Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent and Israeli Minister of Finance Bezalel Smotrich"
date: 2025-03-06
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/sb0043
press_release_number: SB0043
---

WASHINGTON – Today, March 5th  2025, U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent and Israel's Minister of Finance Bezalel Smotrich held a highly impactful meeting to discuss the ongoing economic partnership between the United States and Israel.
The Secretary and the Minister reaffirmed the strong and enduring commitment of both nations to a strategic economic partnership. Their discussions highlighted the importance of deepening economic cooperation, fostering innovation, and strengthening financial and trade ties.
This is a critical time to shape a new strategic economic future for both countries, reinforcing American global leadership and Israel’s role as a key economic partner.
To advance shared economic interests, both sides agreed to strengthen dialogue mechanisms to enhance collaboration in key areas, including economic policy, technology, and financial regulation. As longstanding partners, the United States and Israel recognize the vital role of their economic relationship in driving growth and prosperity for both nations.
Today's meeting marks a significant step in further strengthening U.S.-Israel economic ties. Now, more than ever, a coordinated and forward-looking approach is essential to ensure that this partnership remains a source of economic resilience, innovation, and mutual benefit.
Both parties look forward to continued collaboration and deeper coordination across economic, technological, and financial policy areas to further reinforce bilateral economic relations.
