---
title: Treasury Announces Financial and Economic Partnership and Capital Markets Sector Collaboration with Saudi Arabia, Welcomes Additional Arrangements to Strengthen the Economic Ties Between Our Two Countries
date: 2025-11-18T18:30:00-05:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0318
url: /news/press-releases/sb0318
---
**WASHINGTON** – On November 17, the United States Department of the Treasury and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia signed two new frameworks for enhanced cooperation between our countries.

As part of President Donald J. Trump’s historic Strategic Economic Partnership with Saudi Arabia, announced in May 2025, these new frameworks further deliver on the President’s foreign policy vision that benefits America and its people first. Treasury is keen to leverage our partnership with Saudi Arabia to advance our America First priorities and deliver value for the American taxpayer.

As signed by Secretary Scott Bessent and Finance Minister Mohammed Aljadaan, the **Financial and Economic Partnership Arrangement** solidifies our cooperation and advances key priorities at the World Bank, IMF, and G20 to ensure that these institutions deliver for Americans. As part of this Arrangement, our nations will also continue our close cooperation on anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing issues to make our financial system even safer.

Secretary Bessent and Finance Minister Aljadaan also signed the **Arrangement Regarding Capital Markets Collaboration** with Saudi Arabia to work to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of capital markets activity between our jurisdictions, focusing on capital markets technology, standards, and regulations. Efficiently moving capital for investments between our economies is a key catalyst to realize the full economic potential of the relationship between our countries. We are working to leverage our financial assets to drive growth that benefits the American people. The Treasury Department will lead this engagement for the United States, working in close coordination with key regulators.

Treasury also welcomes the **Strategic Framework for Cooperation on Securing Uranium, Metals, Permanent Magnets, and Critical Minerals Supply Chains,** which will help enable two-way investment in this essential sector and is a cornerstone of the strategic partnership between our nations. Treasury is pleased to have contributed to this Strategic Framework, and we are committed to maximizing the value of our natural resources. This is an essential step toward building a resilient critical minerals market and global supply chain.

Finally, the United States Department of the Treasury and the Zakat, Tax and Customs Authority of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia have also come to agreement in principle on the text of a **Tax Information Exchange Agreement**. This should further the President’s America First policy by deepening the economic relationship between the United States and Saudi Arabia and enhancing both nations’ abilities to prevent and punish cross-border tax abuse and fraud.

