---
title: U.S.-Ukraine Reconstruction Investment Fund Board Meeting
date: 2025-09-05T17:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0236
url: /news/press-releases/sb0236
---
WASHINGTON – On September 3, U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent hosted the inaugural board meeting of the United States-Ukraine Reconstruction Investment Fund (“the Fund”).  The Board approved key items to operationalize the Fund, including nominating the Chair of the Board and adopting committee charters.  The Board also discussed valuation protocols that will facilitate the crediting of preferred shares in the Fund to the United States for any military assistance it delivers to Ukraine, and the potential for the United States and Ukraine to make initial seed investments in the Fund.

Under the leadership of President Donald J. Trump, the United States and Ukraine established the Fund to allow the United States to invest alongside Ukraine to facilitate Ukraine’s recovery.  The Fund will mobilize American talent, resources, and governance standards to improve Ukraine’s investment climate.  It will also work to ensure that no one who financed or supplied the Russian war machine will be allowed to benefit from Ukraine’s reconstruction.

“The Fund will help unlock an abundant and secure economic future for Ukraine—one built upon sound macroeconomic management and robust foreign investment,” said Secretary Bessent.  “I welcome this unprecedented opportunity for the United States to contribute directly to and benefit from Ukraine’s economic development and prosperity.  I look forward to the continued partnership between our two countries in the months and years ahead.”

“The United States and its international partners are working hard to secure a lasting peace for Ukraine.  Included in that peace will be a significant reconstruction and recovery effort, of which the Reconstruction Investment Fund will be an important component.  Through this economic partnership, we can and will make both our countries great again.”
