---
title: Treasury Department Announces New Appointments
date: 2025-06-20T17:05:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0176
url: /news/press-releases/sb0176
---
**WASHINGTON** – Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent announced today key appointments for senior positions at the U.S. Department of the Treasury.

Biographies of the appointees are listed below in alphabetical order:

**Tyler Badgley **will serve as Deputy General Counsel. Mr. Badgley previously served as the Treasury Department’s Executive Secretary. He joined the Department after serving as Senior Counsel at the U.S. Chamber Litigation Center and as Associate at Sullivan & Cromwell. Mr. Badgley also worked as a Special Counsel for Senator Chuck Grassley on the Senate Judiciary Committee, where he helped to confirm Justice Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court. After law school, Mr. Badgley served as a law clerk to Judge Edith Jones of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. Mr. Badgley holds a BA and JD from the University of Virginia.** Francis Brooke **will serve as Counselor to the Secretary. He has been nominated by President Trump to serve as Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Trade and Development.Prior to joining the Treasury Department, he spent nearly four years as Policy Director for House Majority Leader Steve Scalise. Mr. Brooke previously served as Deputy Assistant to the President and Deputy Director of the National Economic Council under Larry Kudlow, where he was charged with running the day-to-day operations of the Council, a 30-person team. In that role, Mr. Brooke helped manage the President’s economic policy agenda, leading the Administration’s efforts to grow the U.S. economy, create jobs, and increase wages. Prior to serving as Deputy Director, Mr. Brooke was Special Assistant to the President for Economic Policy managing the Energy, Environment, Transportation, and Infrastructure policy at the White House. He previously worked as a policy advisor for Vice President Mike Pence, Leader Mitch McConnell, and Representative Andy Barr. Mr. Brooke is a graduate of Northwestern University.** Donald Korb **has been nominated by President Trump to serve as the Chief Counsel of the Internal Revenue Service. Mr. Korb is a practicing tax attorney for over 50 years, both in the public and private sectors. Mr. Korb concentrates his practice on representing clients in tax controversies with the IRS. Currently, he is Of Counsel at Sullivan & Cromwell LLP, and between 2009 and 2015, he headed S&C’s Tax Controversy Practice. Prior to joining S&C, he served as the IRS Chief Counsel from April 2004 until December 2008. Prior to that, he worked twice in the public sector. In the mid-1980s, he served for more than two years as an Assistant to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue. At the beginning of his career, he worked four years as an attorney adviser in the IRS Chief Counsel’s Office. Mr. Korb spent the majority of his practice experience prior to his appointment as Chief Counsel as a tax partner at Thompson Hine in Cleveland, including serving at one time as the Chair of that firm’s Tax Group. If confirmed by the Senate, he will be the first person in history to serve two nonconsecutive terms as the IRS Chief Counsel.** Rachel Miller **will serve as Executive Secretary. Ms. Miller joins the Treasury Department from her role as Senior Vice President, Counsel, and Corporate Secretary at Chain Bridge Bank, N.A. where she advised the bank on its initial public offering and listing on the New York Stock Exchange. She previously served as an Associate in the Government Regulation practice at Jones Day, where she counseled clients on matters relating to corporate governance and political and election law compliance. After law school, Ms. Miller served as a law clerk to Judge Chad A. Readler of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. Ms. Miller received a BA from the University of Texas at Austin and a JD from the University of Notre Dame Law School.** Christopher Pilkerton**will serve as Acting General Counsel of the Department of the Treasury. He has been nominated by President Trump to serve as Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Investment Security. He has previously been the Acting Administrator and General Counsel at the U.S. Small Business Administration, as well as a White House Senior Policy Advisor. Mr. Pilkerton began his career as an Assistant District Attorney in Manhattan and has served as a Senior Enforcement Counsel at the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. He has been a financial services lawyer in private practice, a compliance director at a large global bank, and a senior executive at a community development financial institution. He has held research and teaching posts at various institutions, including the Harvard University Kennedy School of Government, Catholic University of America Law School (CUA), Georgetown University McDonough School of Business, and Johns Hopkins University Carey Business School. He is a former Vice Flotilla Commander in the U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary. Mr.Pilkerton holds an MPA from Columbia University’s School of Public Affairs, a JD from CUA, and a BA from Fairfield University.
