---
title: Treasury Announces Federal Government Will Phase Out Paper Checks on September 30th
date: 2025-08-14T11:13:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0223
url: /news/press-releases/sb0223
---
**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury announced that the federal government will stop issuing paper checks for most federal payments on September 30, 2025. If you are one of the few people who still receives a federal benefit check, it’s time to switch to an electronic payment method.

“Reducing paper checks has been a longstanding bipartisan goal that our administration is finally putting into action. Thanks to President Trump, this will help reduce fraud and theft. It will also remove delays that prevent hardworking Americans from receiving their vital payments,” said **Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent.**

No action is required for the vast majority of Americans who already receive federal benefit payments electronically.

If you are still receiving a paper check for Social Security, Veterans benefits, or any other Federal benefit, enroll in direct deposit using one of the following options:

- Call the Federal agency that pays your benefits and follow their instructions for enrolling in direct deposit. A list of the paying agencies’ contact information can be found [here](https://godirect.gov/gpw/paying-agencies/?language=en).
- Enrolling online at [GoDirect.gov](https://godirect.gov/)
- Call the Electronic Payment Solution Center at 800-967-6857, Monday – Friday 9:00 a.m.-7:00 p.m. ET

**If you do not have a bank account to receive direct deposit you can safely access resources to open an account at**[**FDIC: GetBanked**](https://www.fdic.gov/getbanked)** or**[**MyCreditUnion.gov**](https://mycreditunion.gov/)**.**

You can also sign up for a Direct Express®Debit Mastercard®. Direct Express®is a Treasury-sponsored debit card where you can receive your monthly benefit payments electronically. Individuals without a bank account can sign up by calling Treasury’s Electronic Payment Solution Center at 800-967-6857 or by contacting their paying agency directly.

Always beware of government impersonation scams. Before responding to a request, check it out and, verify it by contacting the agency using a website or phone number you know is real. If you’re unsure, ask a trusted source, like your bank, a friend or family member for help.

Direct deposit is a safer, faster, more convenient way of receiving benefits. Don’t delay—make the switch to an electronic payment method today!

