---
title: Treasury Targets International Bank of Yemen for Support to the Houthis
date: 2025-04-17
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0092
url: /news/press-releases/sb0092
---
WASHINGTON — Today, the Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is sanctioning Yemen-based**International Bank of Yemen Y.S.C.**(IBY) for its financial support to Ansarallah, commonly known as the Houthis, which is part of the Iran threat network.  As part of this designation, OFAC is also sanctioning key leaders or officials of IBY, Kamal Hussain Al Jebry, Ahmed Thabit Noman Al-Absi, and Abdulkader Ali Bazara.  The designation of IBY complements the whole-of-government effort to stop Iran-backed Houthi attacks against commercial shipping in the Red Sea.

“Financial institutions like IBY are critical to the Houthis’ efforts to access the international financial system and threaten both the region and international commerce,” said Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Michael Faulkender.  “Treasury remains committed to working with the internationally recognized government of Yemen to disrupt the Houthis’ ability to secure funds and procure key components for their destabilizing attacks.”

Today’s action against IBY and its officials, which follows the[January 17, 2025](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy2794)designation of Yemen Kuwait Bank for Trade and Investment Y.S.C., further targets the Houthis’ access to and exploitation of Yemen’s banking sector.  It also underscores Treasury’s support for the internationally recognized government of Yemen’s sovereignty over the Yemeni banking system.

This action is being taken pursuant to the counterterrorism authority, Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, as amended. The U.S. Department of State’s designation of Ansarallah as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, became effective on February 16, 2024. On March 4, 2025, the Department of State announced the[re-designation of Ansarallah](https://www.state.gov/designation-of-ansarallah-as-a-foreign-terrorist-organization/)as a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) pursuant to section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended.

### SUPPORTING REPUBLIC OF YEMEN GOVERNMENT PARTNERS

Since the Houthis took control of large portions of Northern Yemen, the group has exploited access to formal financial institutions to facilitate transactions in support of their terrorist activities, which have disrupted international shipping and killed civilians.  To address Houthi exploitation of these financial institutions, following the U.S. designation of the Houthis as an FTO on March 4, 2025, the Central Bank of Yemen – Aden (CBY – Aden) has worked with banks in Houthi-controlled territory to move their operational headquarters to Aden, Yemen, far from the intimidation and coercive influence of the Houthis.  Despite these efforts**, ** IBY continues to refuse to move its headquarters from Houthi-controlled territory.

### INTERNATIONAL BANK OF YEMEN Y.S.C.

Based in Sana’a, Yemen, the**International Bank of Yemen****Y.S.C.**(IBY) is controlled by the Iran-backed Houthis and provides the terrorist group access to the bank’s Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications (SWIFT) network to make international financial transactions.  For instance, IBY has aided Houthi-associated businesses and officials to purchase oil through the bank’s access to the SWIFT network.  IBY has also facilitated attempts by the Houthis to evade sanctions oversight, and has helped the Houthis to mobilize resources and confiscate assets from Houthi opponents.  IBY has refused to comply with CBY – Aden information requests to avoid revealing the details of these Houthi confiscations.

The three individuals designated today hold important leadership roles at IBY and are responsible for the bank’s operations:** Kamal Hussain Al Jebry **is the Chairman of the Board of Directors of IBY;** Ahmed Thabit Noman Al-Absi **is the Executive General Manager of IBY; and** Abdulkader Ali Bazara**is the Deputy General Manager of IBY.

IBY is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for having materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services to or in support of, Ansarallah.

Kamal Hussain Al Jebry, Ahmed Thabit Noman Al-Absi, and Abdulkader Ali Bazara are being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for being leaders or officials of IBY.

### SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated persons described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC.  In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked.  Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons.

Violations of U.S. sanctions may result in the imposition of civil or criminal penalties on U.S. and foreign persons.  OFAC may impose civil penalties for sanctions violations on a strict liability basis.[OFAC’s Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines](https://ofac.treasury.gov/media/7566/download?inline)provide more information regarding OFAC’s enforcement of U.S. economic sanctions.  In addition, financial institutions and other persons may risk exposure to sanctions for engaging in certain transactions or activities with designated entities or otherwise blocked persons.  The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any designated person, or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

Furthermore, engaging in certain transactions with the individuals designated today entails risk of secondary sanctions pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended.  Pursuant to this authority, OFAC can prohibit or impose strict conditions on opening or maintaining, in the United States, a correspondent account or a payable-through account of a foreign financial institution that knowingly conducts or facilitates any significant transaction on behalf of a Specially Designated Global Terrorist.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN) List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law.  The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior.  For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to[OFAC’s Frequently Asked Question 897 here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20230914), and[to submit a request for removal, click here.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list)

[Click here for more information on the entity and individuals designated today.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20250417)

###
