---
title: Treasury Intensifies Sanctions Against Russia by Targeting Russia’s Oil Production and Exports
date: 2025-01-10T10:30:00-05:00
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/jy2777
---
*New energy sector determination targets Russia’s primary revenue source with sanctions against Gazprom Neft and Surgutneftegas, more than 180 vessels, and dozens of oil traders, oilfield service providers, insurance companies, and energy officials*

WASHINGTON — Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury took sweeping action to fulfill the G7 commitment to reduce Russian revenues from energy, including blocking two major Russian oil producers. Today’s actions also impose sanctions on an unprecedented number of oil-carrying vessels, many of which are part of the “shadow fleet,” opaque traders of Russian oil, Russia-based oilfield service providers, and Russian energy officials. Today’s actions are underpinned by the issuance of a new determination that authorizes sanctions pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 14024 against persons operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. These actions substantially increase the sanctions risks associated with the Russian oil trade.

The United Kingdom (UK) is also taking action today, joining Treasury in sanctioning two major Russian oil producers.

“The United States is taking sweeping action against Russia’s key source of revenue for funding its brutal and illegal war against Ukraine,” said Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen. “This action builds on, and strengthens, our focus since the beginning of the war on disrupting the Kremlin’s energy revenues, including through the G7+ price cap launched in 2022. With today’s actions, we are ratcheting up the sanctions risk associated with Russia’s oil trade, including shipping and financial facilitation in support of Russia’s oil exports.”

The Department of State is also taking steps to reduce Russia’s energy revenues by blocking two active liquefied natural gas projects, a large Russian oil project, and third-country entities supporting Russia’s energy exports. State is also designating numerous Russia-based oilfield service providers and senior officials of State Atomic Energy Corporation Rosatom.

## RUSSIA’S ENERGY SECTOR

Today, the U.S. Departments of the Treasury and State are taking action to further implement commitments made by G7 leaders to reduce Russian revenues from energy and other commodities. The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, issued a determination pursuant to E.O. 14024 that authorizes the imposition of sanctions on any person determined to operate or have operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. This new determination strengthens the ability of Treasury and State to target revenue—in particular, revenue generated from the export of oil—that Russia uses to fuel its brutal war against Ukraine and other harmful foreign activities.

Additionally, Treasury issued amended General License 8L, which authorizes certain wind-down transactions related to energy through 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time, March 12, 2025. The narrowing authorization for transactions related to Russian energy further reduces Russia’s ability to leverage this sector and fund its war machine.

## PETROLEUM SERVICES PROHIBITION

Treasury, in consultation with the Department of State, issued a new determination pursuant to E.O. 14071 prohibiting the provision of U.S. petroleum services to persons located in the Russian Federation, cutting off Russia’s access to U.S. services related to the extraction and production of crude oil and other petroleum products. The prohibition takes effect beginning at 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time on February 27, 2025.

## RUSSIAN OIL MAJORS

Pursuant to today’s determination, OFAC designated two of Russia’s most significant oil producers and exporters pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy.

**Public Joint Stock Company Gazprom Neft** (Gazprom Neft) is a Russia-based, vertically integrated oil company whose core activities include the exploration, production, and sale of oil. **Surgutneftegas** is a Russia-based, vertically integrated oil company whose core activities include the exploration, production, and sale of oil.

The UK is also sanctioning Gazprom Neft and Surgutneftegas today.

Alongside Gazprom Neft and Surgutneftegas, OFAC is designating more than two dozen Gazprom Neft and Surgutneftegas subsidiaries. All entities owned 50 percent or more, directly or indirectly, by Gazprom Neft, Surgutneftegas, or their subsidiaries listed today, are also subject to blocking, even if not identified by OFAC.

For more information on the Gazprom Neft and Surgutneftegas subsidiaries targeted today, please see [Annex 1].

## RUSSIA’S SEABORNE OIL EXPORTS

Russia has grown increasingly reliant on vessels that participate in high-risk shipping practices to facilitate illicit or sanctionable activity, often called the “shadow fleet.” Today’s action sanctions 183 vessels, largely oil tankers that are part of the shadow fleet as well as oil tankers owned by Russia-based fleet operators. Several of the vessels sanctioned today have shipped not only Russian oil, but also sanctioned Iranian oil. OFAC is also sanctioning two Russia-based maritime insurance providers, **Ingosstrakh Insurance Company** and **Alfastrakhovanie Group**, which were previously sanctioned by the UK.

For more information on these targets, please see [Annex 2].

## OPAQUE TRADERS OF RUSSIAN OIL

Similarly, Russia’s dependence on opaque traders willing to ship and sell its oil has dramatically increased. These traders often are registered in high-risk jurisdictions, have murky corporate structures and personnel with links to Russia, and conceal their business activities. Many were only established in the wake of Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine and quickly began moving hundreds of millions of dollars’ worth of Russian oil within months of their creation. OFAC has [previously](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy2008)[sanctioned](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy2085) such traders and is taking further action today by sanctioning opaque traders and a shadowy Government of Russia-linked network facilitating massive amounts of oil exports.

For more information on these targets, please see [Annex 3].

## OILFIELD SERVICE PROVIDERS AND RUSSIAN ENERGY OFFICIALS

Russia’s domestic oil industry is supported by providers with critical specialized services that enable producers to keep oil flowing from wells and provide technical know-how and equipment to allow oil producers to access challenging reserves. In addition to the determination described above that prohibits the provision of U.S. petroleum services to persons located in the Russian Federation, today’s action sanctions more than 30 Russia-based oilfield service providers.

Additionally, OFAC is sanctioning more than a dozen leading Russian energy officials and executives, including the CEOs of a number of Russian oil producers.

For more information on these targets, please see [Annex 4.]

## ANNEX 1: RUSSIAN OIL MAJORS

### Gazprom Neft Subsidiaries

The following Russia-based entities are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy:

- **Gapzromneft Moscow Refinery Joint Stock Company** operates an oil refinery.
- **Gazprom Neft Shelf Limited Liability Company** produces oil.
- **Gazpromneft Aero Joint Stock Company** is a leading supplier of jet fuel.
- **Gazpromneft Bitumen Materials Limited Liability Company** produces and sells petroleum products, particularly the petroleum-based hydrocarbon bitumen.
- **Gazpromneft Khantos Limited Liability Company** produces oil.
- **Gazpromneft Lubricants Ltd** produces and sells petroleum products such as oils, lubricants, and technical fluids.
- **Gazpromneft Noyabrsk Oil and Gas Joint Stock Company** produces oil.
- **Gazpromneft Omsk Refinery Joint Stock Company** operates an oil refinery.
- **Gazpromneft Orenburg Limited Liability Company** produces oil.
- **Gazpromneft Technological Partnerships Limited Liability Company** provides scientific and engineering services for customers engaged in the exploration and extraction of hard-to-recover reserves and projects related to chemical methods for enhancing oil recovery.
- **Gazpromneft Vostok LLC** produces oil.
- **Gazpromneft Yamal Limited Liability Company** refines oil.
- **Gazpromneft Zapolyarye Limited Liability Company** extracts oil from the Chadyanda oil and gas condensate field, one of the largest in Eastern Russia.
- **Limited Liability Company Gazpromneft Regional Sales** sells and stores oil and oil products.

The following entities are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 for being owned or controlled by, or having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Gazprom Neft:

- **Chamaiyati Doroi Masauliyati Makhdudi Gazprom Neft Tadzhikistan** is a Tajikistan-based Gazprom Neft subsidiary.
- **Gazprom Neft International SA** is a Luxembourg-based Gazprom Neft subsidiary.
- **Gazprom Neft KazakhstanLLC** is a Kazakhstan-based Gazprom Neft subsidiary.
- **NIS AD Novi Sad** is a Serbia-based Gazprom Neft subsidiary.
- **OSOO Gazprom Neft Aziya** is a Kyrgyz Republic-based Gazprom Neft subsidiary.
- **ZAO Munay Myrza** is a Kyrgyz Republic-based Gazprom Neft subsidiary.

### Surgutneftegas Subsidiaries

The following Russia-based entities are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy:

- **Kaliningradnefteprodukt OOO** sells automotive fuel.
- **KINEF OOO** operates an oil refinery.
- **Kirishiavtovservis AO** sells automotive fuel.
- **Lengiproneftekhim OOO** designs and provides equipment for the construction and reconstruction of oil and gas condensate processing units.
- **Novgorodproduct OOO** sells automotive fuel and manages oil depots.
- **Pskovnefteprodukt OOO** sells automotive fuel.
- **SO Tvernefteprodukt OOO** sells automotive fuel. **Joint Stock Company Surgutneftegasbank** (SNGB) is a Russia-based commercial bank. SNGB is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the financial services sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the financial services sector of the Russian Federation economy.

## ANNEX 2: RUSSIA’S SEABORNE OIL EXPORTS

### Sovcomflot

Treasury is designating [Joint Stock Company Sovcomflot](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy2121)(Sovcomflot), Russia’s state-owned shipping company and fleet operator that specializes in the transportation of hydrocarbons and the servicing and support of offshore oil production, pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. Treasury is also identifying as blocked property 69 vessels, including 54 oil and product tankers and four liquefied natural gas (LNG) tankers, that are owned by Sovcomflot.

Treasury previously sanctioned Sovcomflot pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the marine sector of the Russian Federation economy and for being owned or controlled by, or having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, the Government of the Russian Federation. Treasury also previously identified as blocked property 14 crude oil tankers owned by Sovcomflot.

The following vessels are being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Sovcomflot, a person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662, has an interest:

- Russia-flagged supply vessel***Aleksey Chirikov***(IMO 9613551)
- Russia-flagged products tanker***Alexander Beggrov***(IMO 9876373)
- Russia-flagged products tanker***Alexey Bogolyubov***(IMO 9876361)
- Barbados-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Aria***(IMO 9397559)
- Barbados-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Ariadne***(IMO 9397547)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Bolero***(IMO 9412335)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Callisto***(IMO 9299692)
- Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Captain Kostichev***(IMO 9301392)
- Panama-flagged LNG carrier***Christophe De Margerie***(IMO 9737187)
- Barbados-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Diamond***(IMO 9385142)
- Russia-flagged passenger vessel***Fedor Ushakov***(IMO 9753739)
- Russia-flagged tug***Gennadiy Nevelskoy***(IMO 9742120)
- Barbados-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Jupiter***(IMO 9397535)
- Russia-flagged products tanker***Ivan Aivazovsky***(IMO 9876359)
- Russia-flagged products tanker***Kapitan Gotsky***(IMO 9372559)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Kirill Lavrov***(IMO 9333682)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Leo***(IMO 9412347)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Liberty***(IMO 9339325)
- Russia-flagged products tanker***Mikhail Lazarev***(IMO 9837547)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Mikhail Ulyanov***(IMO 9333670)
- Gabon-flagged crude oil tanker***Moskovsky Prospect***(IMO 9511521)
- Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Nikolay Zadornov***(IMO 9901037)
- Gabon-flagged chemical/oil tanker***NS Pride***(IMO 9322956)
- Panama-flagged chemical/oil tanker***NS Silver***(IMO 9309576)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Okeansky Prospect***(IMO 9866380)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Pathfinder***(IMO 9577094)
- Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Pavel Chernysh***(IMO 9301380)
- Barbados-flagged products tanker***Premier***(IMO 9577082)
- Barbados-flagged LNG carrier***Pskov***(IMO 9630028)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Rigel***(IMO 9511533)
- Barbados-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Saga***(IMO 9318553)
- Russia-flagged supply vessel***SCF Endeavour***(IMO 9335678)
- Russia-flagged supply vessel***SCF Endurance***(IMO 9335680)
- Russia-flagged icebreaker***SCF Enterprise***(IMO 9335692)
- Russia-flagged supply vessel***SCF Sakhalin***(IMO 9307724)
- Barbados-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Serenade***(IMO 9318541)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Shturman Albanov***(IMO 9752084)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Shturman Malygin***(IMO 9752096)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Shturman Ovtsyn***(IMO 9752101)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Sirius***(IMO 9422445)
- Russia-flagged supply vessel***Stepan Makarov***(IMO 9753727)
- Barbados-flagged products tanker***Success***(IMO 9333436)
- Barbados-flagged products tanker***Talisman***(IMO 9292060)
- Barbados-flagged products tanker***Tango***(IMO 9292058)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Timofey Guzhenko***(IMO 9372561)
- Barbados-flagged products tanker***Topaz***(IMO 9292034)
- Barbados-flagged products tanker***Triumph***(IMO 9344033)
- Barbados-flagged products tanker***Trust***(IMO 9382798)
- Barbados-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Universal***(IMO 9384306)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Vasily Dinkov***(IMO 9372547)
- Barbados-flagged LNG carrier***Velikiy Novgorod***(IMO 9630004)
- Panama-flagged products tanker***Victor Konetsky***(IMO 9301421)
- Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Viktor Titov***(IMO 9301407)
- Russia-flagged supply vessel***Vitus Bering***(IMO9613549)
- Russia-flagged LNG carrier***Vostochny Prospect***(IMO 9866392)
- Russia-flagged research***Vyacheslav** Tikhonov***(IMO 9538115)
- Russia-flagged supply vessel***Yevgeny Primakov***(IMO 9753741)
- Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Zaliv Amerika***(IMO 9354301)
- Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Zaliv Amurskiy***(IMO 9354313)
- Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Zaliv Aniva***(IMO 9418494)
- Panama-flagged products tanker***Zaliv Baikal***(IMO 9360128)
- Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Zaliv Vostok***(IMO 9360130)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Zenith***(IMO 9610781)

OFAC is also sanctioning two UAE-based ship managers that support Sovcomflot:** Fornax Ship Management FZCO **(Fornax) and** Stream Ship Management FZCO **(Stream). Sovcomflot has sought to circumvent sanctions by transferring the management of tankers to Fornax and Stream. Fornax and Stream have managed oil-related vessels during port calls in the Russian Federation.Fornax and Stream are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The following vessels are being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Fornax, a person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662, has an interest:

- Barbados-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Hyperion***(IMO 9322968)
- Barbados-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Pegasus***(IMO 9276028)
- Barbados-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Proxima***(IMO 9329655)
- Barbados-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Symphony***(IMO 9309588)

The following vessels are being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Stream, a person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662, has an interest:

- Barbados-flagged products tanker***Atlas***(IMO 9413573)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Capella***(IMO 9341079)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Cassiopeia***(IMO 9341081)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Galaxy***(IMO 9826902)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Legacy***(IMO 9339337)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Vanguard***(IMO 9311622)
- Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Vladimir Arsenyev***(IMO 9901025)
- Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Voyager***(IMO 9843560)
- Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Yuri Senkevich***(IMO 9301419)

### Russian Owned Crude Oil Tankers

Russia-based fleet and bunker operator** Gazpromneft Marine Bunker Limited Liability Company **(Gazpromneft Marine Bunker), a Gazprom Neft subsidiary, is involved in the delivery of bunker fuel for vessels. Gazpromneft Marine Bunker is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy.

OFAC is also identifying the following vessels, all of which Gazpromneft Marine Bunker operates, pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Gazpromneft Marine Bunker has an interest:

- Russia-flagged chemical/oil tanker***GazpromneftZuid East***(IMO 9537109)
- Russia-flagged chemical/oil tanker***GazpromneftNordwest***(IMO 9590137)
- Russia-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Omsk***(IMO 9418509)
- Russia-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Tymen***(IMO 9422653)
- Russia-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Olanga***(IMO 9286463)
- Russia-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Murmansk***(IMO 9167930)
- Russia-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Dmitry Mendeleev***(IMO 9888182)
- Russia-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Shturman Shcherbinin***(IMO 9759927)
- Russia-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Shturman Koshelev***(IMO 9759939)
- Russia-flagged chemical/oil tanker***Shturman Skuratov***(IMO 9759915)

Russia-based** Joint Stock Company Rosnefteflot **(Rosnefteflot) is the marine transportation arm of Russian oil company Open Joint-Stock Company Rosneft Oil Company (Rosneft), which is subject to certain restrictions pursuant to E.O. 13662. Rosnefteflot provides crude oil transportation services. Rosnefteflot is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy.

OFAC is also identifying the following vessels, all of which are owned and operated by Rosnefteflot, pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Rosnefteflot has an interest:

- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Akademik Gubkin***(IMO 9842190)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Dobrynya***(IMO 8730077)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Yard No. 131040 Zvezda-DSME***(IMO 9842205)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Vladimir Vinogradov***(IMO 9842188)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Vladimir Monomakh***(IMO 9842176)
- Russia-flagged shuttle tanker***Valentin Pikul***(IMO 9885879)
- Russia-flagged passenger vessel***Svyatoy Knyaz Vladimir***(IMO 9678238)
- Russia-flagged tug***RN Ussuri***(IMO 9653070)
- Russia-flagged products tanker***RN Sakhalin***(IMO 9650016)
- Russia-flagged tug***RN Amur***(IMO 9653068)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Okeansky Prospect***(IMO 9898254)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Nursultan Nazarbayev***(IMO 9842217)
- Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Yard No. 131080 Zvezda-DSME***(IMO 9908994)

Russia-based** Argo Tanker Group LLC **(Argo Tanker) is the registered owner and ship manager of the Russia-flagged crude oil tanker***Dignity***(IMO 9283241).

Argo Tanker is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Dignity* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Argo Tanker has an interest.

Russia-based **Sunor ILLC** (Sunor) is the registered owner of the Russia-flagged tankers***Boray***(IMO 9198783),***Sanar 7***(IMO 9211999), and***Sanar 8***(IMO 9212008).

Sunor is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Boray, Sanar 7,*and *Sanar 8 * are being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Sunor ILLC has an interest.

Russia-based **RPK Nord Limited Liability Company** (RPK Nord) is the beneficial owner of the Russia-flagged floating crude oil storage tanker***Umba * **(IMO 9196620), salvage tug***Buk * **(IMO 9201994), tug***Vyaz * **(IMO 9804057), and tug***Tis * **(IMO 9817779).

RPK Nord is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Umba*,*Buk*,*Vyaz*, and *Tis * are being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which RPK Nord has an interest.

Russia-based **LK Volga Limited Liability Company** (LK Volga) is the beneficial owner of the Russia-flagged floating crude oil storage tanker***Kola * **(IMO 9217979).

LK Volga is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Kola* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which LK Volga has an interest.

### Shadow fleet

**Prominent Shipmanagement Limited** (PSML) is the commercial and technical manager of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Fjord Seal***(IMO 9513139), which has made port calls in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap on Russian-origin crude oil imposed by the United States and its international partners in the Price Cap Coalition (“the $60 price cap”). PSML also manages the Panama-flagged products tankers***Corum***(IMO 9544281) and***Valour***(IMO 9832559); the Panama-flagged crude oil tankers***Salty Wolf***(IMO 9530917),***Sakarya***(IMO 9524463),***Sable***(IMO 9524451),***Cankiri***(IMO 9411331),***Elegance***(IMO 9383950),***Venture***(IMO 9832547),***Samsun***(IMO 9436006), and***Sivas***(IMO 9419137); and the Panama-flagged***Orient Vision***(IMO 9673202) and***Orient Harmony***(IMO 9620633). The *Fjord Seal*,*Corum*,*Sakarya*,*Salty Wolf*,*Sable*,*Cankiri*,*Elegance*,*Venture*, and *Valour*are considered to be part of the shadow fleet, and the *Samsun* has also shipped Iranian oil.

PSML is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Fjord Seal*,*Corum*,*Salty Wolf*,*Sakarya*,*Sable*,*Cankiri*,*Elegance*,*Venture*,*Valour*,*Samsun*,*Sivas*,*Orient Vision*, and *Orient Harmony* are being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which PSML has an interest.

**Sao Viet Petrol Transportation Company Limited** (Sao Viet) is the beneficial owner of the Vietnam-flagged crude oil tanker***Panda***(IMO 9284582), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. Sao Viet also owns the Vietnam-flagged crude oil tankers***Ivy***(IMO 9337133) and***Leopard***(IMO 9284594), the Vietnam-flagged chemical tanker***Astra***(IMO 9273387), and the Panama-flagged liquefied petroleum gas carrier***Owens***(IMO 9223540). The *Panda*,*Ivy*, and *Leopard *are considered to be part of the shadow fleet, and the *Panda*,*Ivy*,*Leopard*, and *Owens *have also shipped Iranian oil.

Sao Viet is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Panda*,*Ivy*,*Leopard*,*Astra*, and *Owens* are being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Sao Viet has an interest.

**Sino Ship Management Company Limited** (Sino) is the manager of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Deyna***(IMO 9299903), which has made port calls in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. Sino also manages the Panama-flagged crude oil tankers***Sirius 1***(IMO 9285847) and***Turaco***(IMO 9247780). The *Deyna*,*Sirius 1*, and *Turaco* are considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Sino is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Deyna*,*Sirius 1*, and *Turaco* are being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Sino has an interest.

**Sunne Co Limited** (Sunne) is the beneficial owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Heidi A***(IMO 9321976), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap.Sunne also owns the Panama-flagged crude oil tankers***Amber** 6***(IMO 9235713),***Apus***(IMO 9280885),***Aquila **II***(IMO 9281152),***Emily * *S***(IMO 9321847),***Lauren * *II***(IMO 9258521),***M Sophia***(IMO 9289477),***Minerva M***(IMO 9282479),***Sagitta***(IMO 9296822), and***Tasca***(IMO 9313149). The *Amber 6*,*Emily S*,*Heidi A*,*Lauren II*,*M Sophia*,*Minerva M*,*Sagitta*,* *and *Tasca* are considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Sunne is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The*Heidi A*,*Amber 6*,*Apus*,* Aquila **II*,* Emily **S*,*Lauren II*,*M Sophia*,*Minerva M*,*Sagitta*, and *Tasca* are being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Sunne has an interest.

**Meghan Group Limited** (Meghan Group) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Nereus Sophia***(IMO 9266853), which has made port calls in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Nereus Sophia* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Meghan Group is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Nereus Sophia* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Meghan Group has an interest.

**Trident Infinity Limited** (Trident) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Neve***(IMO 9224465), which has made port calls in a Russian port. The *Neve *is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Trident is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Neve* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Trident has an interest.

**Serpens Limited** (Serpens) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Nurkez***(IMO 9253325), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Nurkez* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Serpens is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Nurkez* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Serpens has an interest.

**Amsha Maritime** (Amsha) is the ship operator and commercial manager of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Krishna 1***(IMO 9271585), which has made port calls in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Krishna 1* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Amsha is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Krishna 1* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Amsha has an interest.

**Aristos Maritime Incorporated** (Aristos) is the registered owner of the Gabon-flagged crude oil tanker***Olia***(IMO 9268112), which has made port calls in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Olia* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet and has also traded Iranian oil.

Aristos is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Olia* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Aristos has an interest.

**Bluejourney Shipping Limited** (Bluejourney) is the registered owner of the Antigua & Barbuda-flagged crude oil tanker***Cup***(IMO 9271327), which has made port calls in Russian ports. The *Cup* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Bluejourney is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Cup* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Bluejourney has an interest.

**Celestial Star Corporation** (Celestial) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Aquatica***(IMO 9299769), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Aquatica* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Celestial is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Aquatica* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Celestial has an interest.

**Doxa Shipping Line Inc** (Doxa) is the registered owner of the Gabon-flagged crude oil tanker***Alissa***(IMO 9273052), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Alissa* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Doxa is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Alissa* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Doxa has an interest.

**Elgon Maritime Corporation** (Elgon) is the registered owner of the Gabon-flagged crude oil tanker***Attica***(IMO 9436941), which has made a port call in a Russian port. The *Attica* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Elgon is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Attica* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Elgon has an interest.

**Frina Express Corporation** (Frina) is the registered owner of the Sierra Leone-flagged crude oil tanker***Olivia***(IMO 9233741), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Olivia* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Frina is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Olivia* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Frina has an interest.

**Cheng Shipping and Trader Limited** (Cheng Shipping) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Ping An***(IMO 9378632), which has made port calls in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Ping An* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Cheng Shipping is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Ping An* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Cheng Shipping has an interest.

**Columba Limited** (Columba) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Cepheus***(IMO 9299721), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Cepheus* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Columba is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Cepheus* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Columba has an interest.

**Crius Limited** is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Crius***(IMO 9251274), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Crius* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Crius Limited is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Crius* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Crius Limited has an interest.

**Cube Ventures Shipping SA** (Cube) is the registered owner of the Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Carl***(IMO 9288851), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Carl* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Cube is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Carl* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Cube has an interest.

**Hengtai Shipping Limited** (Hengtai Shipping) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Heng Tai***(IMO 9419448), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Heng Tai* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Hengtai Shipping is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Heng Tai* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Hengtai Shipping has an interest.

**Hera Gam Limited** (Hera Gam) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Freda***(IMO 9402469), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Freda* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Hera Gam is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Freda* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Hera Gam has an interest.

**Hong Kong Yongye Shipping Limited** (HK Yongye) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Clio***(IMO 9238052), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Clio* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet and has also traded Iranian oil.

HK Yongye is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Clio* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which HK Yongye has an interest.

**Kangen Maritime Corporation** (Kangen) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Arjun***(IMO 9297357), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Arjun* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Kangen is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Arjun* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Kangen has an interest.

**Kupa Lines Incorporated** (Kupa) is the registered owner of the Cook Islands-flagged crude oil tanker***Cangjie***(IMO 9299680), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Cangjie* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Kupa is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Cangjie* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Kupa has an interest.

**Luseia Marine Services Co Ltd** (Luseia) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged products tanker***Borey G***(IMO 9199127), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Borey G* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet and has also shipped Iranian oil.

Luseia is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Borey G* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Luseia has an interest.

**Noblefu Company Limited** (Noblefu) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Aulis***(IMO 9233765), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Aulis* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Noblefu is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Aulis* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Noblefu has an interest.

**Ocean Waters Maritime Corporation** (Ocean Waters) is the registered owner of the Barbados-flagged crude oil tanker***Python***(IMO 9250531), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Python* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Ocean Waters is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Python* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Ocean Waters has an interest.

**Symi Shipping Limited** (Symi Shipping) is the registered owner of the Liberia-flagged crude oil tanker***Shun Tai***(IMO 9242223), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Shun Tai*is* * considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Symi Shipping is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The*Shun Tai * is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Symi Shipping has an interest.

**Loengo Shipping and Trader Limited** (Loengo Shipping and Trader) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged product tanker***SI He***(IMO 9378618), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *SI He*is* * considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Loengo Shipping and Trader is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The*SI He * is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Loengo Shipping and Trader has an interest.

**Surrey Quays Company Limited** (Surrey Quays Company) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Surrey Quays***(IMO 9350654), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Surrey Quays*is* * considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Surrey Quays Company is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The*Surrey Quays * is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Surrey Quays Company has an interest.

**Selena Lively Limited** (Selena Lively) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Thalia III***(IMO 9259197), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Thalia III*is* * considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Selena Lively is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The*Thalia III * is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Selena Lively has an interest.

**Double Harmony Marine Corporation** (Double Harmony) is the registered owner of the Cook Islands-flagged crude oil tanker***Makalu***(IMO 9314105) which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Makalu* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Double Harmony is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Makalu* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Double Harmony has an interest.

**Gessi Maritime Corporation** (Gessi) is the registered owner of the Gabon-flagged crude oil tanker***Mercury***(IMO 9321706) which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Mercury* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Gessi is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Mercury* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Gessi has an interest.

**Merluza Group Limited** (Merluza) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Mermar***(IMO 9231212) which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Mermar* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Merluza is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Mermar* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Merluza has an interest.

**Lepus Sai Limited** (Lepus) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Merope***(IMO 9281891) which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Merope* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Lepus is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Merope* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Lepus has an interest.

**Harmony Grove Corporation** (Harmony Grove) is the registered owner of the Sierra Leone-flagged crude oil tanker***Meru***(IMO 9187227) which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Meru* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Harmony Grove is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Meru* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Harmony Grove has an interest.

**Ambra Limited** (Ambra) is the registered owner of the Cook Islands-flagged crude oil tanker***Min Hang***(IMO 9257137) which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Min Hang* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Ambra is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Min Hang* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Ambra has an interest.

**Odine Marine Incorporated** (Odine) is the registered owner of the San Marino-flagged crude oil tanker***Mistral 1***(IMO 9257993) which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Mistral 1* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Odine is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Mistral 1* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Odine has an interest.

**Wavecrest Maritime Limited** (Wavecrest) is the registered owner of the Djibouti-flagged crude oil tanker***Moti***(IMO 9281011) which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Moti* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Wavecrest is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Moti* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Wavecrest has an interest.

**Aquaquasar Holding Limited** (Aquaquasar) is the registered owner of the Antigua & Barbuda-flagged crude oil tanker***Mum***(IMO 9315446) which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Mum* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Aquaquasar is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Mum* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Aquaquasar has an interest.

**Tagabo Maritime Corporation** (Tagabo) is the registered owner of the Gabon-flagged crude oil tanker***Nanda Devi***(IMO 9274434) which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Nanda Devi* is considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Tagabo is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Nanda Devi* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Tagabo has an interest.

**Danika Robert Limited** (Danika Robert) is the registered owner of the Belize-flagged crude oil tanker***Vesna***(IMO 9233349), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Vesna*is* * considered to be part of the shadow fleet and has also shipped Iranian oil.

Danika Robert is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The*Vesna * is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Danika Robert has an interest.

**Xingfu Hai Shipping Limited** (Xingfu Hai Shipping) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Wei Feng** *(IMO 9388754), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Wei Feng*is* * considered to be part of the shadow fleet.

Xingfu Hai Shipping is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The*Wei Feng * is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Xingfu Hai Shipping has an interest.

**Gifted Peak Limited** (Gifted Peak) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Himalayan***(IMO 9392822), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 per barrel price cap. The *Himalayan* is considered part of the shadow fleet.

Gifted Peak is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Himalayan* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Gifted Peak has an interest.

**Huihai Hong Kong Shipping Co Limited** (Huihai Hong Kong) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Hui Hai Atlantic***(IMO 9312872), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Hui Hai Atlantic* is considered part of the shadow fleet.

Huihai Hong Kong is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Hui Hai Atlantic* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Huihai Hong Kong has an interest.

**Hong Kong Hanyuan Shipping Co Limited** (Hong Kong Hanyuan) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Huihai Pacific***(IMO 9346732), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Huihai Pacific* is considered part of the shadow fleet.

Hong Kong Hanyuan is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Huihai Pacific* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Hong Kong Hanyuan has an interest.

**Worthalliance Limited** (Worthalliance) is the registered owner of the Cook Islands-flagged crude oil tanker***Kapal Cantik***(IMO 9224283), which has made a port call in a Russian port. The *Kapal Cantik* is considered part of the shadow fleet.

Worthalliance is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Kapal Cantik* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Worthalliance has an interest.

**Haima Shipping Limited** (Haima) is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Li Bai***(IMO 9589750), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Li Bai* is considered part of the shadow fleet.

Haima is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Li Bai* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Haima has an interest.

**Kat Dennings Limited** is the registered owner of the Panama-flagged crude oil tanker***Lyra***(IMO 9314088), which has made a port call in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap. The *Lyra* is considered part of the shadow fleet.

Kat Dennings Limited is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. The *Lyra* is being identified pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 as property in which Kat Dennings Limited has an interest.

**Lagosmarine Limited** (Lagosmarine) is the technical manager of a crude oil tanker that has made multiple port calls in a Russian port where oil has consistently traded well above the $60 price cap.

Lagosmarine is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy.

*Maritime Insurance Providers*

**Ingosstrakh Insurance Company** (Ingosstrakh) and **Alfastrakhovanie Group** (Alfastrakhovanie) are insurance companies headquartered in Moscow, Russia. Both Ingosstrakh and Alfastrakhovanie have insured oil tankers transporting Russian petroleum products.

Alfastrakhovanie and Ingosstrakh are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the financial services sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the financial services sector of the Russian Federation economy.

## ANNEX 3: OPAQUE TRADERS OF RUSSIAN OIL

### Black Pearl Network

Since 2023, UAE-based **Black Pearl Energy Trading LLC** (Black Pearl) has been a major trader of Russian crude oil, including barrels priced above the $60 price cap. Since 2023, Black Pearl has likely sold more than $2 billion worth of Russian crude oil and oil products.

Black Pearl has connections with the Government of the Russian Federation, which is likely involved in its operations. In particular, Black Pearl has worked with Russia-based **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Tsentr Ekspluatatsionnykh Uslug** (OSC) to move Russian oil. The OSC is wholly owned by the Government of the Russian Federation and is involved in Russian Ministry of Energy projects both domestically in Russia and abroad.

Russian national **Denis Olegovich Deryushkin** (Deryushkin) is a Black Pearl employee involved in Black Pearl’s Russian oil-related activities. Deryushkin is a longtime operator in the Russian energy industry, having previously been the deputy director of the Russian Energy Agency (REA), a division of the Russian Ministry of Energy. While at the REA, Deryushkin created an analytical center that focuses on research and consulting and presents to Russian Ministry of Energy leadership.

Russian national **Alexander Valeryevich Nemirovskiy** (Nemirovskiy) is another Black Pearl employee involved in Black Pearl’s Russian crude oil deals.

UAE-based **Conmar Maritime DMCC** (Conmar) is affiliated with Black Pearl. Conmar has operated on behalf of Black Pearl, including by providing financial services.

Latvian national **Aleksejs Halavins** (Halavins) has been deeply involved in Black Pearl’s Russian oil trade and has been a prolific buyer of above-price cap Russian oil since 2023.

OFAC is also designating a number of companies owned or controlled by Halavins.Halavins owns and manages UAE-based **Conrad Management Company LLC FZ** (Conrad). Halavins is the president of Liberia-registered **Lule One Services Inc** (Lule) and **Lathyrus Shipping Company** (Lathyrus). Halavins holds leadership positions at UAE-registered **International Marine Management FZE** (International Marine) and Liberia-registered **Fulda Shipping Co** (Fulda).

Black Pearl, OSC, Deryushkin, Nemirovskiy, and Halavins are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy.

Conmar is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 for being owned or controlled by, or having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Black Pearl.

Conrad, Lule, Lathyrus, International Marine, and Fulda are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 and E.O. 13662 for being owned or controlled by, or having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Halavins.

### Traders of Russian oil

The following entities are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy:

Established in November 2023, UAE-based **Arctos Shipping And Trade DMCC** was the supplier of at least six shipments of Russian crude oil between February 2024 and May 2024.

UAE-based **Demex Trading Limited DMCC** bought over 700 shipments of crude oil and diesel fuel from Russia worth at least $8 billion in 2023.

Established in November 2022, UAE-based **Eterra Crude Oil Abroad Trading LLC** was the consignee for over 300 shipments of crude oil originating from Russia between September 2023 and April 2024.

Hong Kong-based **Guron Trading Limited** was the consignee for over 400 shipments of crude oil originating from Russia between May 2023 and April 2024.

Established in July 2023, UAE-based **Marion Commodity DMCC** was the supplier of over 250 shipments of crude oil originating from Russia between January 2024 and May 2024.

UAE-based **Marsa Energy Trading DMCC** was the consignee for over 300 shipments of crude oil originating from Russia between March 2022 and April 2024.

Established in September 2022, UAE-based **Pratum Oil Trading LLC** was the consignee for over 50 shipments of crude oil originating from Russia between August 2023 and April 2024.

Established in June 2022, Hong Kong-based **Sunrise X Trading Co Limited** was the buyer of at least 30 shipments of Russia crude oil, with shipments totaling more than $800 million, between January 2023 and May 2023.

Established in January 2024, UAE-based **Zion Trade Limited** supplied at least 10 shipments of Russian export blend crude oil between April 2024 and May 2024.

## ANNEX 4: OILFIELD SERVICE PROVIDERS AND RUSSIAN ENERGY OFFICIALS

### Oilfield Service Providers

The following Russia-based entities are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy:

- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Achimgaz** provides oilfield and gas field services.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Gazprom Shelfproekt** offers production support involving oil and gas industry projects throughout Russia.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Samotlorneftepromkhim** provides oilfield services, specializing in well construction and workover services.
- **Aktsionernoe Obshchestvo Upravlenie Po Povysheniyu Nefteotdachi Plastov I Kapitalnomu Remontu Skvazhin** performs oil and gas well repairs, as well as drilling of oil and gas wells, in Eastern and Western Siberia.
- **Argos** performs services for and works on construction and repair of oil and gas wells.
- **Atlas NNB** provides services for directional drilling (a type of oilfield drilling), including work planning and engineering calculations, as well as geological and technological support for drilling and service of drilling fluids.
- **Denkars** provides services related to the extraction of oil and gas and the maintenance, repair, and disassembly of drilling rigs.
- **Energy of Oil and Gas Service LLC** provides well construction and workover services for Russian oil and gas companies.
- **Frakdzhet Volga** provides support activities for oil and gas operations and creates and develops advanced technologies in the fields of well construction and workover, hydraulic fracturing, and well testing.
- **LLC Golfstrim** specializes in the construction of horizontal and directional wells exploited by the steam-assisted gravity drainage method and has completed the construction of more than 600 horizontal wells for the production of high-viscosity oil and more than 1,500 small-diameter wells.
- **Joint Stock Company Investgeoservis** conducts the entire cycle of oil and gas well construction.
- **Joint Stock Company OFS Technologies** delivers high-tech oilfield services and equipment.
- **Leninogorskremservice Limited Liability Company** is an oilfield services company specializing in drilling of small and conventional diameter wells, drilling of horizontal wellbores, sidetracking, and hydraulic fracturing.
- **Limited Liability Company Catkoneft** provides oilfield services, including services related to hydraulic fracturing, repair and isolation works, and coiled tubing operations.
- **Limited Liability Company Naftagaz Drilling** provides services related to drilling of oil and gas wells and a full range of rig up services.
- **Limited Liability Company Oil Service Garant** providessupport for petroleum extraction, technological supervision of well construction, management and technological supervision of work on routine and major repairs of wells, and technological supervision of the hydraulic fracturing process.
- **Limited Liability Company RN Service** conducts support activities for oil and gas operations and provides well repair services, with production facilities in 12 regions of Russia.
- **Limited Liability Company Welltech** provides services and high-tech solutions for the oil and gas industry.
- **Nauchno Proizvodstvennoe Predpriyatie Burenie** provides support for oil and gas operations.
- **Newteck Well Service LLC** provides services including oil and gas well stimulation with hydraulic fracturing, particularly high-technology hydraulic fracturing stimulation of hard-to-recover and non-conventional resources.
- **Paker Service** renders services for major gas and oil producers and oilfield service firms related to workover and well servicing, testing, and completion. Paker Service also supplies and sells oilfield equipment.
- **Petro Welt Technologies** provides oilfield services in Russia.
- **RN Burenie Limited Liability Company** carries out drilling of oil and gas development and exploratory wells.
- **RN-Grp LLC** provides services related to hydraulic fracturing, cementing, acidic and nitrogen treatment, as well as work involving various technological solutions using coiled tubing for the oil and gas industry.
- **RN Vankor** conducts support activities for oil operations.
- **Rusgazalyans** provides services related to the exploration of oil and gas fields, and the integrated development, construction, and operation of oil and gas fields.
- **Service Prom Komplektatsiya** provides oil and gas field services including drilling of horizontal and directional wells; restoring well flow rates by sidetracking; providing services related to drilling rig installation and dismantling; and maintenance and repair of drilling equipment and instruments.
- **Taimyrburservis** provides oilfield services to a Russian oil project.
- **Tekhnraiz** provides a spectrum of oilfield services for hydrocarbon extraction and deposit exploitation.
- **TNG Grupp** is an oilfield service company that provides geophysical support for the construction of exploration, prospecting and production wells, seismic surveys, and prospecting services.
- **Tsentr Nauchno Issledovatelskikh I Proizvodstvennykh Rabot** primarily works on corrosion monitoring of oilfield equipment.
- **TSS Limited Liability Company** specializes in the manufacturing of completion systems for the construction and reconstruction of oil and gas wells.
- **UDS Neft** provides services related to exploration, oil and gas production, conditioning and transportation of oil and petroleum-containing fluid, and well servicing and workover.
- **Veteran** provides oilfield services in Russia.

### Energy Officials and Elites

The following individuals, all of whom are Russian nationals, are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy and pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy:

**Yusuf Vagitovich Alekperov** is the founder and owner of Russian oilfield services company Limited Liability Company Welltech, which is also being designated today. **Peter Mikhailovich Bobylev** is the Head of the Department for Coal Industry Development at the Ministry of Energy of the Russian Federation. **Vladimir Nikolaevich Chernov** is the CEO of a major Russian oil company. **Aleksandr Valeryevich Dyukov** is the CEO of Gazprom Neft. **Sergei Ivanovich Kudryashov** is the CEO of a major Russian oil company. **Nail Ulfatovich Maganov** is the General Director of a major Russian oil company. **Roman Anatolyevich Marshavin** (Marshavin) is a Deputy Minister at the Ministry of Energy of the Russian Federation. In that role, Marshavin coordinates the Russian Ministry of Energy’s international cooperation activities. **Vadim Alekseevich Pavlov** (Pavlov) is the Director of the Department for the Implementation of Special Projects at the Ministry of Energy of the Russian Federation. Pavlov oversees energy projects in Russian-occupied territories of Ukraine. **Dmitry Borisovich Semenov** is the Director of the Department of International Cooperation at the Ministry of Energy of the Russian Federation. **Eduard Mikhailovich Sheremettsev** is a Deputy Minister of Energy and the Head of Digital Transformation at the Ministry of Energy of the Russian Federation. **Artem Aleksandrovich Verhov** is the Director of the Gas Industry Development Department at the Ministry of Energy of the Russian Federation. **Vadim Nikolaevich Vorobyev** is the CEO of Lukoil OAO (Lukoil), a major Russian oil company that is subject to certain restrictions pursuant to E.O. 13662. **Vladimir Leonidovich Bogdanov** (Bogdanov) is the CEO of Surgutneftegas. OFAC [previously designated Bogdanov](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm0338) on April 6, 2018 pursuant to E.O. 13662 for operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy. Today, Bogdanov is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14024 for operating or having operated in the energy sector of the Russian Federation economy.

## SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the persons above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. All transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or blocked persons are prohibited unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt. These prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any blocked person and the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person. Non-U.S. persons are also prohibited from causing or conspiring to cause U.S. persons to wittingly or unwittingly violate U.S. sanctions, as well as engaging in conduct that evades U.S. sanctions. OFAC’s [Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines](https://ofac.treasury.gov/media/7566/download?inline) provide more information regarding OFAC’s enforcement of U.S. sanctions, including the factors that OFAC generally considers when determining an appropriate response to an apparent violation.

In addition, foreign financial institutions that conduct or facilitate significant transactions or provide any service involving Russia’s military-industrial base, including any persons blocked pursuant to E.O. 14024, run the risk of being sanctioned by OFAC. For additional guidance, please see the [updated OFAC advisory](https://ofac.treasury.gov/media/932436/download?inline), “Updated Guidance for Foreign Financial Institutions on OFAC Sanctions Authorities Targeting Support to Russia’s Military-Industrial Base,” as well as OFAC Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)[1146-1152](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/search?search_api_fulltext=&fulltext_phrase_search=&field_faq_number%5Bmin%5D=1146&field_faq_number%5Bmax%5D=1152&sort_bef_combine=search_api_relevance_DESC), [1181-1182](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/search?search_api_fulltext=&fulltext_phrase_search=&field_faq_number%5Bmin%5D=1181&field_faq_number%5Bmax%5D=1182&sort_bef_combine=search_api_relevance_DESC). Non-U.S. persons, including foreign financial institutions, could also face sanctions for knowingly facilitating significant transactions for or on behalf of the individuals or entities blocked pursuant to E.O. 13662. See FAQs [541-546](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/search?search_api_fulltext=&fulltext_phrase_search=&field_faq_number%5Bmin%5D=541&field_faq_number%5Bmax%5D=546&sort_bef_combine=search_api_relevance_DESC), [574](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/574) for additional information.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the SDN List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please refer to [OFAC’s FAQ 897 here.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/897) For detailed information on the process to submit a request for [removal from an OFAC sanctions list, please click here.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list)

Any persons included on the SDN List pursuant to E.O. 14024 or E.O. 13662 may be subject to additional export restrictions administered by the Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS).

[For identifying information on the individuals, entities, and vessels sanctioned today, click here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20250110).

