---
date: '2025-12-19'
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0343
title: Treasury Targets Family Members and Associates of Maduro Regime
url: /news/press-releases/sb0343
---

December 19, 2025

**WASHINGTON** — Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) sanctioned several family members and associates of the Maduro-Flores family. This action further targets the narco-corruption structure that sustains Nicolás Maduro’s illegitimate regime, namely the familial networks of Carlos Erik Malpica Flores (Malpica Flores) and Ramon Carretero Napolitano (Ramon Carretero).

“Today, Treasury sanctioned individuals who are propping up Nicolás Maduro’s rogue narco-state. We will not allow Venezuela to continue flooding our nation with deadly drugs,” said**Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent**. “Maduro and his criminal accomplices threaten our hemisphere’s peace and stability. The Trump Administration will continue targeting the networks that prop up his illegitimate dictatorship.”

### SANCTIONING MADURO ASSOCIATES AND THEIR FAMILIES

On [December 11, 2025](</news/press-releases/sb0332>), OFAC sanctioned Malpica Flores, a nephew of Maduro’s wife Cilia Flores, pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13692 for being a current or former official of the Government of Venezuela. Malpica Flores, who has been repeatedly linked to corruption at Venezuela’s state-run oil company, Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA), has leveraged his family connections for his transnational financial operations.

Today, OFAC is designating the following individuals pursuant to E.O. 13850 for being immediate adult family members of Malpica Flores, a person determined to be responsible for or complicit in, or to have directly or indirectly engaged in, any transaction or series of transactions involving deceptive practices or corruption and the Government of Venezuela or projects or programs administered by the Government of Venezuela: **Eloisa Flores de Malpica** , Malpica Flores’s mother and the sister of Cilia Flores; **Carlos Evelio Malpica Torrealba** , his father; **Iriamni Malpica Flores** , his sister; **Damaris del Carmen Hurtado Perez** , his wife; and **Erica Patricia Malpica Hurtado** , his adult daughter. 

In addition, today’s action builds on OFAC’s [December 11, 2025](</news/press-releases/sb0332>) designation of Panamanian businessman Ramon Carretero by designating the following individuals pursuant to E.O. 13850 for being immediate family members of Ramon Carretero, a person determined to be responsible for or complicit in, or to have directly or indirectly engaged in, any transaction or series of transactions involving deceptive practices or corruption and the Government of Venezuela or projects or programs administered by the Government of Venezuela: **Roberto Carretero Napolitano** and **Vicente Luis Carretero Napolitano**. Ramon Carretero has transacted extensively with the Maduro regime, including the family of Malpica Flores. 

### SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated or blocked persons described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC. In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of blocked persons. 

Violations of U.S. sanctions may result in the imposition of civil or criminal penalties on U.S. and foreign persons. OFAC may impose civil penalties for sanctions violations on a strict liability basis. [OFAC’s Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines](<https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-31/subtitle-B/chapter-V/part-501/appendix-Appendix%20A%20to%20Part%20501>) provide more information regarding OFAC’s enforcement of U.S. economic sanctions. In addition, financial institutions and other persons may risk exposure to sanctions for engaging in certain transactions or activities involving designated or otherwise blocked persons. The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any designated or blocked person, or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person. 

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List), but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law. The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior. For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, or to submit a request, please refer to OFAC’s guidance on [Filing a Petition for Removal from an OFAC List](<https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list>).

[Click here for more information on the persons designated today](<https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20251219>).

###