---
title: "Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent Before the Atlantic Council Global Citizen Awards"
date: 2025-09-25
draft: false
url: /news/press-releases/sb0263
press_release_number: SB0263
---

As prepared for delivery
Just a few years ago, Argentina’s economy was in shambles. Decades of mismanagement had led to runaway inflation, high unemployment, debt defaults, and irresponsible money printing.
When pressed by the people, the government’s solution to each of these problems was always
Más
.  More spending. More social programs. More bureaucracy.
But as the government did more, the people had less.
One man recognized government wasn’t the solution—it was the problem. One man had the courage to stand up for Argentina by standing against the establishment. And that man stands beside us this evening.
Tonight, we recognize President Javier Milei for his tireless efforts to Make Argentina Great Again.
President Milei has transformed Argentina for the better.
In place of a corrupt, budget-busting bureaucracy, the Milei administration has built a lean, efficient government that looks to safeguard the property, liberty, and free enterprise of its people.
As President Milei noted last week, financial equilibrium is the cornerstone of growth. To that end, President Milei has presented a plan to achieve a fiscal surplus for the third year in a row.
Thanks to President Milei’s visionary leadership, the world is starting to see Argentina with fresh eyes.
Of course, this process of transformation has not been without opposition.
Generational reform is painful.  And that pain invites derision from those who have been voted out of power. Hence, the chorus of criticism from incumbents of the old system.
But President Milei has stayed the course and remains committed to his core principles. Like President Trump, he has empowered the Argentinian people by making sure the government serves
them
—not the other way around.
There is a knock-on effect from President Milei’s governing philosophy. It has galvanized reforms not only in Argentina but in other Latin American countries as well.
President Milei is a leader of a great nation but also a continent. He has inspired Argentina’s youth to question the stale proposition that the heavy hand of government is the path to prosperity.  In doing so, he has reignited faith in free-markets and laid the foundation for a new Golden Age in Argentina.
In recognition of these monumental achievements, I am pleased to present the Atlantic Council’s Global Citizen Award to President Javier Milei.
###
