---
title: Treasury Department Announces New Appointments
date: 2025-07-29T18:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0210
url: /news/press-releases/sb0210
---
**WASHINGTON** – Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent announced today key appointments for senior positions at the U.S. Department of the Treasury.

Biographies of the appointees are listed below in alphabetical order:

** Alley Adcock** will serve as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs, Appropriations and Management. She most recently served as Professional Staff Member on the House Appropriations Committee’s Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Subcommittee. She previously served as Professional Staff Member on the Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Financial Services and General Government Subcommittee and various positions at the House Judiciary Committee. She is a graduate of the University of Alabama.** G. Hunter McMaster II** will be performing the duties of Assistant Secretary for Financial Markets. He is currently serving as Director of Policy & Planning at the U.S. Department of the Treasury. He previously was the Head of Trading at Key Square Group. Prior to his role at Key Square, Mr. McMaster held positions at Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs, where he focused on foreign exchange and interest rate markets. Mr. McMaster has a BS in Mathematics from Washington and Lee University. He is a native of Columbia, South Carolina.** Luke Pettit** will serve as acting Under Secretary of Domestic Finance. He is currently serving as Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions at the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Mr. Pettit previously worked as a senior policy adviser to U.S. Senator Bill Hagerty. Prior to that, he was an economist for the Senate Banking Committee and held positions at Bridgewater Associates and the Federal Reserve in the Division of Monetary Affairs. Mr. Pettit holds a BA in Philosophy, Politics and Economics from the University of Pennsylvania, an MSc in Economic History from the London School of Economics, and an MS in Applied Economics from Johns Hopkins University.

