---
title: Treasury Targets Network Procuring Missile Propellant Ingredients for Iran
date: 2025-04-29T12:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0116
url: /news/press-releases/sb0116
---
WASHINGTON — Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is designating six entities and six individuals based in Iran and the People’s Republic of China (PRC) for their role in a network procuring ballistic missile propellant ingredients on behalf of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC).  This network has facilitated the procurement of sodium perchlorate and dioctyl sebacate from the PRC to Iran.  Sodium perchlorate is used to produce ammonium perchlorate, which is controlled by the [Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR)](https://www.state.gov/bureau-of-international-security-and-nonproliferation/releases/2025/01/missile-technology-control-regime-mtcr-frequently-asked-questions), a multilateral political understanding among states that seek to limit the proliferation of missiles and missile technology.  Both ammonium perchlorate and dioctyl sebacate are chemicals usable in solid propellant rocket motors, which are commonly used for ballistic missiles.

“Iran’s aggressive development of missiles and other weapons capabilities imperils the safety of the United States and our partners,” said Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent.  “It also destabilizes the Middle East, and violates the global agreements intended to prevent the proliferation of these technologies.  To achieve peace through strength, Treasury will continue to take all available measures to deprive Iran’s access to resources necessary to advance its missile program.”

Today’s action is being taken pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13382, which targets proliferators of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their means of delivery.  This action is also being taken in furtherance of [National Security Presidential Memorandum 2](https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/02/national-security-presidential-memorandum-nspm-2/), which directs the U.S. government to curtail Iran’s ballistic missile program, including working with key allies on the potential snapback of UN sanctions, and to disrupt the IRGC.  The United States designated the IRGC pursuant to E.O. 13382 in October 2007.

## SAMAN TEJARAT BARMAN TRADING COMPANY, MOHAMMAD ASGARI, AND SHENZHEN AMOR LOGISTICS CO LTD

Iran-based **Saman Tejarat Barman Trading Company** (STB) has procured sodium perchlorate for use by the IRGC, and Iran-based STB associate ** Mohammad Asgari** (Asgari) has coordinated the shipment of that sodium perchlorate from the PRC to the IRGC in Iran with PRC-based ** Shenzhen Amor Logistics Co Ltd** (Shenzhen Amor).  Shenzhen Amor has also coordinated the STB shipment with companies including U.S.-designated, PRC-based E-Sail Shipping Company Limited (E-Sail Shipping).  The U.S. Department of State [designated](https://2017-2021.state.gov/designation-of-the-islamic-republic-of-iran-shipping-lines-e-sail-shipping-company-ltd-and-mahan-air/) E-Sail Shipping pursuant to E.O. 13382 in December 2019, and the designation took effect in June 2020.

STB, Asgari, and Shenzhen Amor are being designated pursuant to E.O. 13382 for having provided, or attempted to provide, financial, material, technological or other support for, or goods or services in support of, the IRGC.

## SAMAN TEJARAT BARMAN TRADING COMPANY’S NETWORK

** Abed Zargar Bab Aldashti** (Abed Zargar),** Hamed Zargar Bab Aldashti** (Hamed Zargar), and ** Zahra Zargar Bab Aldashti** (Zahra Zargar)—all based in Iran—hold key leadership roles at STB. Abed Zargar is the Managing Director, Hamed Zargar is the Chairman of the Board, and Zahra Zargar is Vice Chairman of the Board.

Abed Zargar, Hamed Zargar, and Zahra Zargar are being designated pursuant to E.O. 13382 for acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, STB.

Iran-based ** Forough Modarres Fathi** (Forough Modarres) has served as the Vice Chairman and a member of the Board of Directors of STB.** Abbas Pour Kazemi** (Pour Kazemi), also based in Iran, is the Chief Inspector for STB.

Forough Modarres and Pour Kazemi are being designated pursuant to E.O. 13382 for having provided, or attempted to provide, financial, material, technological or other support for, or goods or services in support of, STB.

PRC-based ** Dongying Weiaien Chemical Co Ltd** (Dongying) has supplied dioctyl sebacate to STB.

Dongying is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13382 for having provided, or attempted to provide, financial, material, technological or other support for, or goods or services in support of, STB.

## SHENZHEN AMOR LOGISTICS CO LTD’S NETWORK

PRC-based ** Yanling Chuanxing Chemical Plant General Partnership** (Yanling Chuanxing Chemical Plant) has shipped products including sodium chlorate, which is used to produce sodium perchlorate and ammonium perchlorate, on behalf of Shenzhen Amor.

Yanling Chuanxing Chemical Plant is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13382 for having provided, or attempted to provide, financial, material, technological or other support for, or goods or services in support of, Shenzhen Amor.

PRC-based ** China Chlorate Tech Co Limited** (CCT) has transferred funds to Yanling Chuanxing Chemical Plant and describes Yanling Chuanxing Chemical Plant as its factory.

CCT is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13382 for having provided, or attempted to provide, financial, material, technological or other support for, or goods or services in support of, Yanling Chuanxing Chemical Plant.

PRC-based ** Yanling Lingfeng Chlorate Co Ltd** (Yanling Lingfeng Chlorate) has received funds from CCT and shares personnel with both CCT and Yanling Chuanxing Chemical Plant.

Yanling Lingfeng Chlorate is being designated pursuant to E.O. 13382 for having provided, or attempted to provide, financial, material, technological or other support for, or goods or services in support of, CCT.

## SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated person(s) described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons is/are blocked and must be reported to OFAC.  In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked.  Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC or exempt, U.S. sanctions generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons.  Violations of U.S. sanctions may result in the imposition of civil or criminal penalties on U.S. and foreign persons.  OFAC may impose civil penalties for sanctions violations on a strict liability basis.  OFAC’s Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines provide more information regarding OFAC’s enforcement of U.S. economic sanctions.  In addition, financial institutions and other persons may risk exposure to sanctions for engaging in certain transactions or activities with designated or otherwise blocked persons.

Exports, reexports, or transfers of items subject to U.S. export controls involving persons included on the SDN List pursuant to E.O. 13382 may be subject to additional restrictions administered by the Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security. See 15 C.F.R. section 744.8 for additional information.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the SDN List, but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law.  The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior.  For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, please [refer to OFAC’s Frequently Asked Question 897 here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20230914) and [to submit a request for removal, click here](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[Click here for more information on the individuals and entities designated today.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20250429)

