---
title: Treasury and IRS Issue Proposed Regulations Around “No Tax on Tips” Deduction
date: 2025-09-22T15:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0258
url: /news/press-releases/sb0258
---
**WASHINGTON** – Today, the Treasury Department and IRS issued proposed regulations identifying the occupations that customarily and regularly received tips before 2025, and therefore may be eligible for the deduction. The proposed regulations also address the definition of “qualified tips” and other requirements taxpayers must comply with to claim the deduction.

“I took my first job as a busboy when I was just nine-years old. I cleared tables at a local cafeteria and set up chairs and umbrellas at a beach nearby. And I depended on tips for a significant portion of my income. To this day, tens of millions of Americans depend on tips to feed their families, pay their rent, and make ends meet, said ** Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent.**“Through forward-thinking policies like “No Tax on Tips”, the President is boosting paychecks for America’s working families. This is critical to our goal of achieving Parallel Prosperity by building an economy where Main Street and Wall Street grow together. All workers deserve an equal chance to pursue the American Dream.”

The “No Tax on Tips” provision, enacted with OBBBA, allows employees and self-employed individuals to deduct up to $25,000 of qualified tips they received in a year, per return. Eligible taxpayers may claim the deduction on their 2025 tax return that they file next year.

The deduction for qualified tips is available to eligible taxpayers who itemize their deductions, as well as those who do not itemize and take the standard deduction. The deduction phases out for taxpayers with incomes above $150,000 (or $300,000 in the case of a joint return).

[More information can be found here](https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2025/09/22/2025-18278/occupations-that-customarily-and-regularly-received-tips-definition-of-qualified-tips):

