---
title: Treasury Sanctions “El Chapo’s” Children and Los Chapitos, a Fentanyl-Trafficking Faction of the Sinaloa Cartel
date: 2025-06-09T13:00:00-04:00
draft: false
press_release_number: SB0161
url: /news/press-releases/sb0161
---
**WASHINGTON** – Today, the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) sanctioned ** Los Chapitos**, a powerful faction of the Mexico-based Sinaloa Cartel that facilitates illicit fentanyl trafficking and production.  Los Chapitos-controlled laboratories are responsible for introducing fentanyl in counterfeit pills manufactured by the Sinaloa Cartel and trafficked to the United States.  Gunmen linked to the Sinaloa Cartel were also involved in the October 18, 2024 killing of former U.S. Marine Nicholas Quets in Sonora, Mexico.

Additionally, OFAC is designating two fugitive leaders of Los Chapitos, ** Archivaldo Ivan Guzman Salazar** and ** Jesus Alfredo Guzman Salazar**,** sons of incarcerated Sinaloa Cartel leader Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman Loera**.  Through its Narcotics Rewards Program, the U.S. Department of State is offering a reward of up to $10 million each for information leading to the arrest and/or conviction of [Archivaldo Ivan Guzman Salazar](https://www.state.gov/ivan-archivaldo-guzman-salazar/) and [Jesus Alfredo Guzman Salazar](https://www.state.gov/jesus-alfredo-guzman-salazar/).

“Los Chapitos is a powerful, hyperviolent faction of the Sinaloa Cartel at the forefront of fentanyl trafficking into the United States,” said ** Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent**.  “At the Department of the Treasury, we are executing on President Trump’s mandate to completely eliminate drug cartels and take on violent leaders like ‘El Chapo’s’ children.  Treasury is maximizing all available tools to stop the fentanyl crisis and help save lives.”

OFAC also ** sanctioned a regional network of Los Chapitos associates and businesses** based in Mazatlan, Sinaloa, Mexico, that engages in drug trafficking, extortion, kidnapping, and money laundering.  Today’s action was coordinated with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA).

Today’s action is pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 14059, which targets the proliferation of illicit drugs and their means of production, and pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, which targets terrorists and their supporters.  This is OFAC’s ninth action taken against the cartels, international drug trafficking, and human smuggling across the southern border since the beginning of the Administration.

## SINALOA CARTEL

The Sinaloa Cartel is one of the oldest and most powerful cartels in Mexico and represents a major threat to the United States.  The Sinaloa Cartel was identified by the United States as a significant foreign narcotics trafficker on [April 15, 2009](https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/realitycheck/the-press-office/fact-sheet-overview-foreign-narcotics-kingpin-designation-act) pursuant to the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act (Kingpin Act).  On [December 15, 2021](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0535), OFAC also designated the Sinaloa Cartel pursuant to E.O. 14059.  The Sinaloa Cartel has trafficked fentanyl, methamphetamine, cocaine, and other illicit drugs into the United States and engaged in widespread violence.  On [February 20, 2025](https://www.state.gov/designation-of-international-cartels/), the U.S. Department of State designated the Sinaloa Cartel as a Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) and a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT).

## FLOOD OF FENTANYL: LOS CHAPITOS

Collectively referred to as Los Chapitos, the four sons of El Chapo—** Archivaldo Ivan Guzman Salazar** (Ivan),** Jesus Alfredo Guzman Salazar** (Alfredo), Ovidio Guzman Lopez (Ovidio), and Joaquin Guzman Lopez (Joaquin)—have consolidated control over and assumed leadership of the Sinaloa Cartel through their self-named Los Chapitos faction.  Although Ovidio and Joaquin are now in U.S. custody, Ivan and Alfredo remain fugitives in Mexico.  Los Chapitos’ dominance overfentanyl trafficking is largely the result of the faction’s capacity to procure precursor chemicals, while also controlling production via its secret laboratories in Sinaloa.  Since September 2024, turf wars between Los Chapitos and its rivals have engulfed the Mexican state of Sinaloa, resulting in the deaths of over 600 people.

Los Chapitos is being sanctioned pursuant to E.O. 14059 and pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for being owned, controlled, or directed by, or having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, the Sinaloa Cartel.

From left to right:*Archivaldo Ivan Guzman Salazar; Jesus Alfredo Guzman Salazar; Joaquin Guzman Lopez; Ovidio Guzman Lopez.*

Ivan’s leadership of Los Chapitos has sparked an alarming spate of violence in Mexico and the United States against civilians, law enforcement, and rival cartel members.  Alfredo, serving as lieutenant to his brother Ivan, has participated in the torture of rivals to solicit information about potential infiltration into Los Chapitos-controlled territory.  Ivan and Alfredo were previously designated on [May 8, 2012](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/tg1576) and [June 7, 2012](https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/tg1609), pursuant to the Kingpin Act and again in 2021 pursuant to E.O. 14059.

Archivaldo Ivan Guzman Salazar and Jesus Alfredo Guzman Salazar are being designated pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for being owned, controlled, or directed by, or having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, the Sinaloa Cartel.

## MURDER AND MONEY IN MAZATLAN

Today’s action also targeted an important cell of Los Chapitos in Mazatlan, Sinaloa, Mexico. The Mazatlan cell is led by **Victor Manuel Barraza Pablos** (Barraza), a Los Chapitos plaza boss who manages the group’s violent and criminal activities in the region, including drug trafficking, murder, kidnapping, extortion, and the production of fentanyl.  Many of Barraza’s nefarious activities are financed by Mexican businessman ** Jose Raul Nunez Rios** (Nunez).  Nunez, a close associate of both Ivan and Barraza, appears to have become wealthy in a short period of time.  Beginning in approximately 2021, Nunez purchased properties and established real estate development, construction, and hospitality companies in Mazatlan and throughout the state of Sinaloa in what appears to be an effort to launder the illicit proceeds from drug trafficking for several high-ranking leaders of the Sinaloa Cartel.  Nunez eventually sided with Los Chapitos and is currently funding Barraza’s war against the group’s rivals in Mazatlan.

Victor Manuel Barraza Pablos and Jose Raul Nunez Rios are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14059, and pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for being owned, controlled, or directed by, or having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, the Sinaloa Cartel.

Nunez’s wife, ** Sheila Paola Urias Vazquez** (Urias), is a Mazatlan-based make-up artist who is also involved in her husband’s criminal network as the nominal owner of multiple entities including a spa, salon, real estate, and hospitality businesses.  Nunez has and continues to use Urias as a front person to operate companies on his behalf.

Sheila Paola Urias Vazquez is being designated pursuant to E.O. 14059, and pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for being owned, controlled, or directed by, or having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Nunez.

In addition to designating the key individuals in Los Chapitos’ Mazatlan financial network, OFAC is sanctioning ten businesses owned or controlled by Nunez. ** Beach Y Marina, S.A. de C.V.**;** Club Playa Real, S.A. de C.V.**;** Proyecta Interna, S.A. de C.V.**;** Eco Campestres Ultra, S.A.P.I. de C.V.**;** IMB 24 Siete, S.A. de C.V.**;** MKT 24 Siete, S.A. de C.V.**;** Mue Renta Y Venta de Vestidos**;** Carpe Diem Spa**;** Sea Wa Beach Club, S.A. de C.V.**; and ** Comercializadora Copado, S.A. de C.V.** are being designated pursuant to E.O. 14059, and pursuant to E.O. 13224, as amended, for being owned, controlled, or directed by, or having acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Nunez.

## SANCTIONS IMPLICATIONS

As a result of today’s action, all property and interests in property of the designated or blocked persons described above that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked and must be reported to OFAC.  In addition, any entities that are owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons are also blocked. Unless authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, or exempt, OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of blocked persons.

Violations of U.S. sanctions may result in the imposition of civil or criminal penalties on U.S. and foreign persons.  OFAC may impose civil penalties for sanctions violations on a strict liability basis. [OFAC’s Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-31/subtitle-B/chapter-V/part-501/appendix-Appendix%20A%20to%20Part%20501) provide more information regarding OFAC’s enforcement of U.S. economic sanctions.  In addition, financial institutions and other persons may risk exposure to sanctions for engaging in certain transactions or activities involving designated or otherwise blocked persons.  The prohibitions include the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any designated or blocked person, or the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

Furthermore, engaging in certain transactions involving the persons designated today may risk the imposition of secondary sanctions on participating foreign financial institutions.  OFAC can prohibit or impose strict conditions on opening or maintaining, in the United States, a correspondent account or a payable-through account of a foreign financial institution that knowingly conducts or facilitates any significant transaction on behalf of a person who is designated pursuant to the relevant authority.

The power and integrity of OFAC sanctions derive not only from OFAC’s ability to designate and add persons to the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List), but also from its willingness to remove persons from the SDN List consistent with the law.  The ultimate goal of sanctions is not to punish, but to bring about a positive change in behavior.  For information concerning the process for seeking removal from an OFAC list, including the SDN List, or to submit a request, please refer to OFAC’s guidance on [Filing a Petition for Removal from an OFAC List](https://ofac.treasury.gov/specially-designated-nationals-list-sdn-list/filing-a-petition-for-removal-from-an-ofac-list).

[Click here for more information on the persons designated today](https://ofac.treasury.gov/recent-actions/20250609).

[To view a chart on the individuals and entities designated today, click here.](https://ofac.treasury.gov/media/934321/download?inline)

