---
title: Secretary Snow Visits Cincinnati and Columbus, Ohio This Week
date: 2004-09-15
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/js1920
---

*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS



js-1920

  

U.S. Treasury Secretary John W. Snow will visitCincinnati,Ohioon Thursday, September 16 andColumbus,OHon Friday, September 17 tomeet with local business leaders and discuss the President's efforts to strengthen the economy and create jobs. In Cincinnati, Secretary Snow will be joined by U.S. Congressmen Steve Chabot and Rob Portman, both of Ohio.



"As a result of the President's economic leadership, we have overcome a recession and seen 12 straight months of job creation, totaling 1.7 million newU.S.jobs since August 2003," said Secretary Snow. "The President's tax reform policies have ensured that more than 4.4 millionOhiotaxpayers will have lower income tax bills in 2004."



During this trip toOhio, Secretary Snow also will discuss the Administration's efforts to control health care costs, reduce frivolous lawsuits and ensure thatAmericahas reliable and affordable sources of energy.  "While the economy is on solid footing, we are not satisfied and there is still more work to be done.  We need to continue to push for pro-growth policies that will create jobs and raise standards of living," Secretary Snow said.



Recent indicators show that President Bush's economic policies continue to move the economy forward. According to the Labor Department, the national unemployment rate declined to 5.4% in August – down 0.9 percentage point from a peak of 6.3% in June 2003 and the lowest rate since October 2001. At 5.4%, the unemployment rate is below the average of the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. Employment over the last year was up in 46 of the 50 states and the unemployment rate was down in all regions and in 49 of the 50 states.



The following events are open to the media, which must present media credentials or photo ID:



**Thursday, September 16**



Roundtable with theCincinnatiMinority Business Acceleratorand Tour of CBS Technologies**10:00 am**CBS Technologies6900 Steger DriveCincinnati,OH



** Media should arrive by9:15 am** A brief press availability will occur immediately following the event



Remarks to theCincinnatiChamber of Commerce Luncheon**12:00 pm**CarewTower441 Vine StreetSuite300, 3rd FloorCincinnati,OH** Media should arrive by11:30 am



**Friday, September 17**



Roundtable on Workforce Development and Retraining**9:30 am**HondrosCollege4140 Executive ParkwayWesterville,OH



** Media should arrive by9:00 am** A brief press availability will occur immediately following the event



-30-
