---
title: '*Media Advisory* Thursday: Senior Treasury Official To Hold Background Briefing On Wall Street Reform'
date: 2011-07-14
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/07142011
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – A senior Treasury official will hold a background briefing ahead of next week’s one year anniversary of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The briefing will occur at 1:15 pm on Thursday, July 14, 2011 in the Media Room at the Department of Treasury. Wall Street Reform was enacted in the aftermath of a crisis that cost millions of American jobs and erased trillions of dollars in savings. That law addresses key gaps and weaknesses in the pre-crisis financial system to help make future financial shocks less likely and less damaging. The senior Treasury official will speak about how the Dodd-Frank Act’s reforms are vital to restoring confidence and rebuilding a pro-growth, pro-investment financial system, as well as how efforts to scale back or repeal that law would put our economy at greater risk of another devastating financial crisis.   **WHO**:             Senior Treasury Official **WHAT**: Background Briefing on the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act **WHEN**: 1:15 PM EST, Thursday, July 14, 2011 **WHERE**:        U.S. Department of Treasury   1500 Pennsylvania Ave, NW   Media Room A, 4121   Washington, DC   A conference call line will be available for this briefing.  For dial-in information, please email [Lacey.Rose@treasury.gov](mailto:Lacey.Rose@treasury.gov). **Media planning to attend** **must RSVP by Thursday, July 14 at 10:00am** to Frances Anderson in Treasury’s Office of Public Affairs at [Frances.Anderson@treasury.gov](mailto:Frances.Anderson@treasury.gov) or (202) 622-2960. Media who do not have Treasury press credentials must include the following information: name, Social Security number, date of birth and country of citizenship. Please note that this is a background briefing only; no cameras or recording devices for broadcast purposes will be allowed. All media should arrive by 12:45pm and should enter the Treasury building through the Pennsylvania Avenue (North) entrance.
