---
title: U.S. Treasury Secretary Geithner to Attend G-7 Meeting Of Finance Ministers in Marseille, France, September 9-10, 2011
date: 2011-08-31
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/08312011
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner will travel to Marseille, France to attend the G-7 Meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors and the Deauville Partnership Finance Ministers’ Meeting on September 9-10, 2011. The Secretary will meet with his international counterparts to discuss the need for a reinvigorated global effort to support growth, jobs and financial stability. On Saturday, Secretary Geithner will participate in a meeting of the Deauville Partnership to discuss continued efforts to support successful transitions toward democratic societies and more inclusive economies in the Middle East and North Africa. Additional details regarding Secretary Geithner’s schedule will be made available over the coming days.   **Travel arrangements and hotel accommodations will be the responsibility of each media organization.** Suggested date of departure is Thursday, September 8, 2011, with a return of Sunday, September 11, 2011. Currently, press opportunities are scheduled for Friday, September 9, 2011 and Saturday, September 10, 2011, including pooled media opportunities for the meeting and a G-7 press conference at its conclusion. Additional details will be announced by meeting organizers. If you are planning to attend, please email Frances Anderson at [frances.anderson@treasury.gov](mailto:frances.anderson@treasury.gov) with your likely travel dates and contact information, so Treasury can communicate logistical updates as necessary. **Media credentials**: Online registration is available at [https://media.accreditation2011.com/php/login.php](https://media.accreditation2011.com/php/login.php). **PLEASE NOTE: THE DEADLINE TO REGISTER FOR MEDIA CREDENTIALS IS SEPTEMBER 5.**
