---
title: 'Wednesday: In Visit to Portland, Secretary Geithner to Tour Oregon Iron Works, Discuss State of U.S. Economy at Local City Club'
date: 2012-04-23
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/04232012c
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON –**On Wednesday, April 25, Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner will visit Portland, Oregon. As part of his trip, the Secretary will tour the Oregon Iron Works/United Streetcar facility in Clackamas to highlight the importance of investing in domestic manufacturing and infrastructure to strengthen the U.S. economy and create jobs.  Later in the day, the Secretary will deliver remarks before the Portland City Club and participate in a conversation about the state of the U.S. economy with David Miller of Oregon Public Broadcasting.  In his remarks, Secretary Geithner will outline the primary economic imperatives facing the country and review the Administration’s efforts to support economic growth in the short term, put in place the right investments and reforms for our future, and restore fiscal sustainability under a balanced approach.  During his visit to Portland, Secretary Geithner will also participate in a roundtable discussion about the economy with local business leaders.

  

**Press Logistics**

   

**9:00 AM PDT**



SECRETARY TIM GEITHNER TOURS OREGON IRON WORKS/ UNITED STREET CAR FACILITY



Oregon Iron Works/United Streetcar9898 SE Mather RoadClackamas, Oregon

  

There will be a b-roll opportunity of the Secretary’s tour of Oregon Iron Works for TV cameras and still photographers.  All press must arrive by 8:00am for security sweeps.  Interested media must RSVP to Christine Hotchkin at[chotchkin@unitedstreetcar.com](mailto:chotchkin@unitedstreetcar.com).For safety purposes,**visitors must wear closed-toe shoes.**

  

**1:30 PM PDT **



REMARKS AND DISCUSSION ON THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY WITH SECRETARY GEITHNER HOSTED BY THE PORTLAND CITY CLUBThe Governor Hotel614 SW 11thAvenuePortland, Oregon

  

Press reservations are free; however, members of the press are required to make reservations naming each individual who plans to attend. Each member of the press must check in and present an outlet-associated press badge. All press with cameras and equipment should arrive by 12:15pm for security sweeps. Final access is 12:45pm. These times are subject to change. Final guidance confirming times will be sent out after RSVP. RSVP to[amy@pdxcityclub.org](mailto:amy@pdxcityclub.org)or 503-228-7231 x110.



###​
