---
title: Secretary Geithner to Attend G-20 and IMF, World Bank Spring Meetings and Host Deauville Ministerial in Washington, April 19-21, 2012
date: 2012-04-16
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/04162012b
---

*(Archived Content)*



**WASHINGTON –**The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that Secretary Tim Geithner will attend the G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting and the spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank as well as host a Deauville Partnership Ministerial in Washington, April 19-21, 2012.

  

Ahead of the meetings, on Wednesday, April 18, Secretary Geithner will participate in a discussion on the state of the global economy at the Brookings Institution.



On April 19 and 20, Secretary Geithner will attend the G-20 Meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors at the IMF in Washington, to discuss the state of the global recovery and policies to ensure stability in Europe and boost global growth.

  

On April 20, Secretary Geithner will host a meeting of Finance Ministers of the Deauville Partnership with Arab Countries in Transition to discuss initiatives to assist the region following the Arab Spring.

  

On April 20 and 21, Secretary Geithner will attend the spring meetings of the IMF and the World Bank.  As well as discussing the challenges facing the global economy, the meetings will also review efforts to strengthen surveillance of members’ exchange rate and international reserve policies, challenges facing developing and emerging economies, and other development challenges including issues of gender inclusiveness and food security.

  

Additional details on the Secretary’s schedule for the week will be announced in the days ahead.

  

**Press Logistics**

  

**Wednesday, April 18**

  

**8:30 AM EDT**



SECRETARY GEITHNER PARTICIPATES IN A CONVERSATION ON THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY WITH WASHINGTON POST COLUMNIST DAVID IGNATIUS



The Brookings Institution



1775 Massachusetts Avenue, NW



Washington, DC

  

This event is open press. For additional information, please contact the Brookings Office of Communications at (202) 797-6105.

  

**Friday, April 20**

  

**9:45 AM EDT**



G-20 FINANCE MINISTERS AND CENTRAL BANK GOVERNORS MEETING



IMF



1900 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW



Washington, DC

  

This meeting is closed press, but there will be a family photo at**12:15 PM.**For additional information, please contact Ana Olvera Espinosa at[Ana_olverae@hacienda.gob.mx](mailto:Ana_olverae@hacienda.gob.mx).

  

**2:00 PM EDT**



SECRETARY GEITHNER HOSTS DEAUVILLE PARTNERSHIP MINISTERIAL WITH ARAB COUNTRIES IN TRANSITION



World Bank



1818 H Street, NW



Washington, DC

  

This meeting is closed press, but there will be a photo spray at the conclusion of the meeting.**PLEASE NOTE:**This photo spray is open only to video and still photographers who have obtained press credentials for the 2012 Spring Meetings.  Media who wish to attend must RSVP to Stephanie Ma at[Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov](mailto:Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov)by Thursday, April 10 at 12:00 PM.** Please plan to arrive at the IMF/World Bank press desk at 1900 Pennsylvania Ave, N.W. no later than 3:00 PM.****Saturday, April 21**

  

**8:00 AM EDT**



IMFC GOVERNORS MEETING



IMF



1900 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW



Washington, DC

  

This meeting is closed press, but there will be a family photo at**9:30 AM.**For additional information, please contact[press@imf.org](mailto:press@imf.org).

    

###

​
