---
title: '**UPDATED** TOMORROW: Secretary Geithner to Visit BNSF Railway in Texas, Discuss Economy with Local Business Leaders'
date: 2012-03-07
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/030712
---

*(Archived Content)*

  

*******Updated to reflect press call times and change in start time for the BNSF tour*******

**WASHINGTON - **On Thursday, March 8, Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner will tour BNSF’s Alliance Intermodal Facility in North Fort Worth to highlight the importance of domestic infrastructure development to the competitiveness of American businesses. While in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, the Secretary will also meet with local business leaders at the Dallas Regional Chamber to discuss the state of the economy and the President’s efforts to create jobs and a stronger American economy that is built to last. During his visit, the Secretary will discuss the President’s FY2013 Budget, which includes common-sense proposals to revitalize American infrastructure by creating a 21st century transportation network that allows companies to ship their goods more efficiently throughout the country and the world. The U.S. Senate is considering a key part of that plan – a multi-year surface transportation reauthorization bill. A modern transportation infrastructure network, supported by both public and private investment is vital for the economy and job creation. **Press Logistics** 

**TOMORROW, Thursday, March 8, 2012**

**12:05 PM CST      ** SECRETARY GEITHNER TOURS BNSF INTERMODAL FACILITY BNSF Railway 1111 Intermodal Parkway Haslet, Texas There will be a b-roll opportunity of the Secretary’s tour of BNSF for TV cameras and still photographers.  **For security purposes, press should arrive by 11:00 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up, including press without media equipment. **For additional information, please contact Krista York-Woolley at [krista.york-woolley@bnsf.com](mailto:krista.york-woolley@bnsf.com). **3:00 PM CST** CONVERSATION ON THE ECONOMY WITH SECRETARY GEITHNER HOSTED BY DALLAS REGIONAL CHAMBER Sheraton Hotel Dallas Ballroom 400 North Olive Street Dallas, Texas This event is open press.  **For security purposes, press should arrive by 2:00 p.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up, including press without media equipment. ** For additional information, please contact John McCarley at [jmccarley@dallaschamber.org](mailto:jmccarley@dallaschamber.org).   ###​
