---
title: Secretary Geithner to Visit Siemens Energy Plant in North Carolina
date: 2012-01-19
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/01192012
---

*(Archived Content)*

*Following State of the Union Address, Visit to Highlight the President’s Efforts to Create Jobs * **WASHINGTON** – On Wednesday, January 25, Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner will tour Siemens Charlotte Energy Hub in North Carolina to highlight the importance of investing in manufacturing and innovative technologies to create jobs and build a stronger American economy.  He will also meet with local business leaders at the Charlotte Chamber of Commerce to discuss the state of the economy and the President’s efforts to create jobs, including policies to strengthen the ability of U.S. companies and businesses to compete abroad. Siemens Energy has invested more than $350 million in Charlotte in the last four years - an investment that will create more than 1,000 jobs, many of them highly-skilled, at the facility in the next three years, bringing the total number of employees to more than 1,800.  The company’s Charlotte plant recently underwent a $130 million expansion to strengthen its export capabilities.   **Press Logistics** **Wednesday, January 25, 2012** 12:30 PM EST SECRETARY GEITHNER TOURS SIEMENS CHARLOTTE ENERGY HUB Charlotte Plant 5101 Westinghouse Boulevard Charlotte, NC *There will be a b-roll opportunity of the Secretary’s tour of Siemen’s facilities for TV cameras and still photographers.  Interested media must RSVP to Katie Walton at katie.walton@siemens.com by 12:00 p.m. on Monday, January 23. **There will be finalized press call times to follow. For safety purposes, visitors must wear flat, closed-toe shoes with hard soles.  Heels and running shoes are prohibited.  *** 2:15 PM EST CONVERSATION ON THE ECONOMY WITH SECRETARY GEITHNER MODERATED BY CHARLOTTE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE CHAIR FRANK EMORY Charlotte Chamber of Commerce, Belk Action Center 330 South Tryon Street Charlotte, North Carolina


This event is open press. Media interested in attending the event must RSVP by 12:00 p.m., Monday, January 23 to Natalie Dick,[ndick@charlottechamber.com](mailto:ndick@charlottechamber.com).** There will be finalized press call times to follow.    **

###
