---
title: 'Thursday: Secretary Geithner to Address the Commonwealth Club in San Francisco'
date: 2012-04-23
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/04232012d
---

*(Archived Content)*



**Remarks to Review U.S. Economic Relationship with China Ahead of Upcoming Dialogue in Beijing, ****With Moderated Discussion on the U.S. and Global Economies to Follow**

  

**WASHINGTON –**Ahead of the fourth round of the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue next week in Beijing, Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner will discuss our economic relationship with Chinaon Thursday, April 26, 2012 in remarks before the Commonwealth Club in San Francisco. Secretary Geithner will review the progress made to date in advancing opportunities with China for U.S. firms and workers as well as the economic challenges that remain for our two countries. He will underscore the importance of enhancing cooperation between the U.S. and China to address those challenges and will also address the roles each country can play to reinforce the global recovery. Following his remarks, he will engage in a moderated discussion with Adam Lashinsky of Fortune Magazine.  During his visit to San Francisco, Secretary Geithner will also participate in a roundtable with business leaders to discuss the state of the economy.

  

**WHO: **Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner

  

**WHAT:**Remarks and Discussion on the U.S. and Global Economies



**WHEN:**1:00 PM PDT, Thursday, April 26, 2012

  

**WHERE:**The Mark Hopkins Hotel



999 California Street



San Francisco, California

  

This event is open press. Media interested in attending the event must RSVP by 12:00 PM PDT on April 25 to Riki Rafner at[rrafner@commonwealthclub.org](mailto:rrafner@commonwealthclub.org). Media with camera equipment and satellite trucks should arrive by 11:30 AM for security sweeps. All other media should arrive by 12:30 PM.

  

###​
