---
title: U.S. Treasury Secretary Geithner to Attend G-20 Summit in Los Cabos, Mexico June 18-19, 2012
date: 2012-06-13
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/06132012
---

*(Archived Content)*



​



**WASHINGTON**** –**The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner will attend the G-20 Summit in Los Cabos, Mexico on June 18-19, 2012. The Secretary will attend G-20 meetings with the President on June 18-19. On June 18, he will also attend a working dinner of Finance Ministers in the evening. On June 19, Secretary Geithner will conduct a bilateral meeting with Chinese Vice Premier Wang Qishan in the afternoon. He will also attend a working lunch of Finance Ministers. These meetings are closed press. He will depart Mexico for the United States on the evening of June 19.



At 4:30 PM EDT today, Secretary Geithner will participate in a conversation on the global economy ahead of the G-20 Summit, moderated by NBC’s Chief Foreign Affairs Correspondent Andrea Mitchell at the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR) in Washington. This event is open press. To RSVP or for more information, contact[DCPressRSVP@cfr.org](mailto:DCPressRSVP@cfr.org).



Further information regarding the Secretary’s schedule will be made available in the days ahead.



If you are planning to attend the G-20, please email Ronda Buckmon at[ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov](mailto:ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov)with your travel dates and contact information, so Treasury can communicate logistical updates regarding the Secretary’s schedule as necessary.



Further information regarding media accreditation for the G-20 is available at[http://www.g20.org/index.php/en/acreditaciones](http://www.g20.org/index.php/en/acreditaciones).



###
