---
title: U.S.-China Strategic and Economic dialogue to be held May 3-4, 2012 in Beijing, China
date: 2012-04-23
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/04232012
---

*(Archived Content)*

**Reminder: Applications for Media Credentials Due April 24 2012** **WASHINGTON -** The fourth round of the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue will be held in Beijing, China, May 3-4, 2012. Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton will be joined for the Dialogue by their respective Chinese Co-Chairs, Vice Premier Wang Qishan and State Councilor Dai Bingguo. The schedule of press events will include but is not limited to an opening session on Thursday, May 3 and a U.S. press conference on Friday, May 4. Further details regarding the agenda and additional press opportunities will be made available shortly. In order to facilitate transportation with the U.S. delegation, a block of rooms with a special media rate is being held for media at the Ritz-Carlton, Beijing. Please contact Janice Tong, Director of Sales, at the Ritz-Carlton (Tel: +8610 5908 8933 or Email: [janice.tong@ritzcarlton.com](mailto:janice.tong@ritzcarlton.com)) to reserve a room. Requests for media credentials and visa letters should be sent by 07:00 AM EDT on Tuesday, April 24, 2012, to the public affairs office at the U.S. Embassy in Beijing. Please fill out the attached excel spreadsheet with your information and email a saved copy of it (save as Last Name-First Name-Passport #) with a digital photo (at least 72 dpi, less than 150K and saved as Last Name-First Name-Passport #) to [BeijingMediaCredential@state.gov](mailto:BeijingMediaCredential@state.gov). ***** PLEASE NOTE: THE APPLICATION DEADLINE IS 7:00 AM EDT ON TUESDAY, APRIL 24, 2012. THIS IS A HARD DEADLINE – NO EXCEPTIONS WILL BE MADE. ***** ###​
