---
title: 'Thursday: Secretary Geithner to Discuss Economy with Baltimore Business and Community Leaders, Tour Marlin Steel Wire Facility'
date: 2012-05-15
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/05152012
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON –** On Thursday, May 17, Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner will visit Baltimore to deliver remarks and participate in a discussion on the state of the economy with members of the Greater Baltimore Committee.  In his remarks before local business leaders, the Secretary will outline the primary economic imperatives facing the country and review the Administration’s efforts to support economic growth in the short term, put in place the right investments and reforms for our future, and restore fiscal sustainability under a balanced approach.  Later in the morning, Secretary Geithner will tour local manufacturer Marlin Steel Wire Products. He will highlight the importance for Congress to take action on the President’s “To Do List” and pass a new hire tax credit that will help small businesses like Marlin Steel create jobs in communities across the country.  During his visit to Baltimore, Secretary Geithner will also meet with business and community leaders at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County.  **Press Logistics** **8:30 AM EDT** Secretary Tim Geithner Remarks before the Greater Baltimore Committee Baltimore Marriott Waterfront Hotel Harborside Ballroom, 4th Floor
700 Aliceanna Street Baltimore, Maryland This event is open press. Media with satellite trucks and camera equipment should arrive by 7:00 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. All other press should arrive by 8:00 a.m. Media planning to attend must RSVP to Gene Bracken at [geneb@gbc.org](mailto:geneb@gbc.org) or (410) 727-2820, x33. Press call times are subject to change. **11:30 AM EDT        ** Secretary Tim Geithner Tour of Marlin Steel Wire’s Manufacturing Facility Marlin Steel Wire 2640 Merchant Drive Baltimore, Maryland There will be a b-roll opportunity of the Secretary’s tour for TV cameras and still photographers. Media planning to attend must RSVP to Stephanie Ma at [Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov](mailto:Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov). **For security purposes, press should arrive by 10:45 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up, including press without media equipment. **Press call time is subject to change.      ###​
