---
title: U.S. Treasury Secretary Lew to travel to Asia November 10-15, 2013
date: 2013-11-08
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/11082013
---

*(Archived Content)*

  **Trip to Highlight Importance of TPP, Boosting Regional Growth, Global Demand** **WASHINGTON** – The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that Secretary Jacob J. Lew will travel to Japan, Singapore, Malaysia, Vietnam and China next week to hold discussions with his counterparts about the U.S. and regional economic outlook. Secretary Lew will also discuss policies to boost regional growth and global demand, including the objective of completing the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) Agreement negotiations this year, and in China, he will discuss progress on the reform agenda and efforts to level the playing field for U.S. workers and business. The Secretary will also discuss the implementation of international economic sanctions on Iran and North Korea as well as other issues related to combating illicit finance. On Tuesday, November 12, the Secretary will arrive in Tokyo, Japan for meetings with senior government officials. He will also meet with business leaders for a roundtable discussion on the U.S.-Japan economic relationship and the global economy hosted by the American Chamber of Commerce. On Wednesday, November 13, Secretary Lew will be in Singapore for meetings with senior government officials and business leaders. In the evening, he will travel to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. On Thursday, November 14, the Secretary will be in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, to meet with senior government officials and business leaders. In the afternoon, he will travel to Hanoi, Vietnam for meetings with senior government officials. In the evening, he will depart Hanoi for Beijing, China. On Friday, November 15, Secretary Lew will be in Beijing, China to meet with senior government officials. The Secretary will depart Beijing for Washington on Saturday, November 16. Additional details and information about media opportunities will be announced in the coming days. Media planning to travel to any of these destinations may contact [holly.shulman@treasury.gov](mailto:holly.shulman@treasury.gov) for information about logistics and required visas. ###​
