---
title: '**UPDATED PRESS CALL TIMES** THURSDAY: Secretary Lew to visit Manufacturing Plant and meet with Business Leaders In Atlanta, Georgia'
date: 2013-03-13
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/03142013
---

*(Archived Content)*

  **In First Trip Since Taking Office, Secretary Lew to Discuss Importance of Growing the Economy, Creating Jobs and Strengthening the Middle Class** **WASHINGTON - **On Thursday, March 14, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will travel to Atlanta, Georgia to visit Siemens’ GA 400 Manufacturing Facility in Alpharetta to highlight the importance of investing in infrastructure, manufacturing and innovative technologies to strengthen the middle class, increase the momentum of the recovery and speed the pace of job creation. Over the past 10 years, Siemens has invested $25 billion in the U.S.  The company’s facility near Atlanta, one of 130 manufacturing operations throughout the country, develops and manufactures drive components that support major American industries, including rail, mining, and transportation.  Its hybrid and electric drive systems are powering transportation infrastructure, such as the new Atlanta Streetcar project, reducing fuel costs and polluting emissions for the city.  Siemens’ investments in infrastructure, manufacturing and innovative technologies have created thousands of high-skilled jobs in the United States. While in Atlanta, the Secretary will also meet with local business leaders to discuss the President’s proposals to make America a magnet for new jobs and manufacturing, accelerate economic growth, and reduce our deficits in a balanced way. The roundtable discussion hosted by the Metro Atlanta Chamber is closed press.  **Press Logistics: ** **1:00 PM EST** SECRETARY LEW TOURS SIEMENS MANUFACTURING FACILITY Siemens GA 400 Manufacturing Facility 100 Technology Drive Alpharetta, Georgia There will be a b-roll opportunity of the Secretary’s tour with Helmuth Ludwig, CEO Siemens Industry Sector, North America for TV cameras and still photographers. Media planning to attend must RSVP to Robert Bartels at (678) 662-4783 or [robert.bartels@siemens.com](mailto:robert.bartels@siemens.com) by 10:00 a.m., March 13. Press should arrive by 12:00 p.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. Press call time is subject to change.  For safety reasons, all visitors must wear safety glasses and closed-toe shoes. **2:15 PM EST** SECRETARY LEW HOLDS BRIEF MEDIA AVAILABILITY WITH HELMUTH LUDWIG, CEO SIEMENS INDUSTRY SECTOR, NORTH AMERICA Siemens GA 400 Manufacturing Facility 100 Technology Drive Alpharetta, Georgia *The availability is open press. Media planning to attend must RSVP to *Robert Bartels at (678) 662-4783 or [robert.bartels@siemens.com](mailto:robert.bartels@siemens.com) by 10:00 a.m., March 13. Press not planning to attend the b-roll must arrive on campus by 12:30 p.m. to register. Press call time is subject to change.   **###**​​
