---
title: 'WEDNESDAY: Treasury to Host Public Meeting of Financial Literacy and Education Commission'
date: 2014-02-07
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/02072014
---

*(Archived Content)*

  **WASHINGTON – **On Wednesday, February 12, 2014, Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions Cyrus Amir-Mokri will deliver opening remarks to a public meeting of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission. He will discuss ways the federal government can partner with state and local governments to advance the financial capability of our nation’s young people, as well as the ways the Obama Administration is working to build economic security for the middle class and empower all those hoping to join it. Assistant Secretary Amir-Mokri will be joined by Delaware Governor Jack Markell and Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) Director Richard Cordray.  **Press Logistics:** **9:00 AM EST** Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions Cyrus Amir-Mokri Remarks before a Public Meeting of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC) U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, DC This event is open press. A live webcast will also be available here: [https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts](https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts). Interested media must **RSVP by 1:00 p.m. on Tuesday, February 11**, to Ronda Buckmon at [Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov](mailto:Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov).  Media without press credentials issued by Treasury must include the following information for access into the building: full legal name, date of birth, Social Security number, and country of citizenship.    Media attending with camera equipment should arrive at the South Entrance (on 15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Avenue) no later than **7:45 a.m**. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by **8:30 a.m.** at the North entrance (Pennsylvania Avenue and 15th Street). ###​
