---
title: 'March 10, 2014: Inaugural Public Meeting of the President’s Advisory Council on Financial Capability for Young Americans'
date: 2014-03-06
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/03062014
---

*(Archived Content)*

**FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: March 6, 2014 ** **CONTACT: Treasury Public Affairs (202) 622-2960** **** MEDIA ADVISORY**** **WASHINGTON –** On Monday, March 10, 2014, Secretary Jacob J. Lew will deliver opening remarks at a public meeting of the President’s Advisory Council on Financial Capability for Young Americans. The Secretary will discuss the importance of increasing opportunities for upward economic mobility in the U.S. through the promotion of financial capability among young Americans in schools, colleges, communities and the workplace. Secretary Lew will be joined by Department of Education Secretary Arne Duncan, among others.       **WHAT:Public Meeting of the President’s Advisory Council on Financial Capability for Young Americans** **WHO: **            ·         Secretary Jacob J. Lew ·         Department of Education Secretary Arne Duncan ·         Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) Director   Richard Cordray ·         Cecilia Muñoz, Assistant to the President and Director of the Domestic Policy Council ·         Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions Cyrus Amir-Mokri **·**         John Rogers, Chair of the Council For additional information on the Council, please visit: [http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education/Pages/New-President%27s-Advisory-Council-on-Financial-Capability-for-Young-Americans.aspx](http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/financial-education/Pages/New-President%27s-Advisory-Council-on-Financial-Capability-for-Young-Americans.aspx)    **WHEN**:          Monday, March 10, 2014   9:00 AM EST **WHERE:**       U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room                      1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, DC   This event is open press. A live webcast will also be available at [https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts](https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts).     Media planning to attend must **RSVP by 3:00 p.m. on Friday, March 7** to [press@treasury.gov](mailto:press@treasury.gov).   Media without press credentials issued by Treasury must include the following information for access into the building: (1) full legal name, (2) date of birth, (3) Social Security number, and (4) country of citizenship.  Media attending with camera equipment should arrive at the South entrance (on 15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Avenue) no later than **7:30 a.m**. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by **8:30 a.m.** at the North entrance (Pennsylvania Avenue and 15th Street).   ### ​
