---
title: "OFR and FSOC Co-Host Third Annual Conference"
date: 2014-01-21
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/01212014
---
*(Archived Content)*
 
**Thursday: Office of Financal Research and Financial Stability Oversight Council Co-Host THIRD Annual Conference**
 
**WASHINGTON** – On Thursday, January 23, the Office of Financial Research and the Financial Stability Oversight Council will host their third annual joint conference, entitled Mapping and Monitoring the Financial System: Liquidity, Funding, and Plumbing. The conference will bring together financial market participants, policy makers, regulators and researchers to discuss the data, risk management, and financial stability challenges posed by the consistently evolving nature of financial activity.
 
Morning panels will focus on mapping liquidity and funding, and on mapping financial system “plumbing” to help assess counterparty and operational risks. Following luncheon keynote remarks, afternoon sessions will discuss challenges and risks associated with the expansion in central clearing, including presentations on data standards and gaps for trade and swap data repositories, and a discussion of central counterparty developments and risks.  
 
**WHO:   **Office of Financial Research
 
Financial Stability Oversight Council
 
 
 
**WHAT:**          “Mapping and Monitoring the Financial System: Liquidity, Funding, and Plumbing” Conference
 
**WHEN:**          Thursday, January 23, 2014   8:45 a.m. – 4:30 p.m. EST
 
**WHERE:**        U.S. Department of the Treasury
 
Cash Room
 
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
 
Washington, D.C.
 
THE CONFERENCE WILL ALSO BE WEBCAST LIVE at [https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts](https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts). 
 
All sessions are open press. Following is a draft agenda, which is subject to change:
 
**8:45 a.m.**         **Welcome and Introduction**
 
Mary Miller, Department of the Treasury
 
**9:00 a.m.         Session 1 - Liquidity and Funding Maps: Analytics and Funding Risks**
 
**10:30 a.m.       Session 2 - Mapping Financial System Plumbing: Operations Risk and Counterparty Risk**
 
**12:15 p.m.      Lunch Keynote Speaker**
 
Paul Tucker, Harvard Kennedy School 
 
**1:30 p.m.        Session 3 - Swap and Trade Repositories: Data Standards and Data Gaps**
 
**3:00 p.m.        Session 4 - Policy Panel: Risk in CCPs**
 
**4:15 p.m.        Closing Remarks**
 
Richard Berner, Office of Financial Research
 
All interested members of the media, including press credentialed with Treasury, **must RSVP no later than 12:00 p.m. EST on Wednesday, January 22**, to Stephanie Ma at [Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov](mailto:Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov). Media without Treasury press credentials must include the following information for access into the building: full legal name, date of birth, Social Security number, and country of citizenship.  Press with camera equipment must also include a brief description of equipment. 
 
Press with camera equipment should arrive at the South entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) by 7:00 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps. All other press must arrive at the North entrance (15th Street and New York Avenue) no later than 8:00 a.m. and proceed to the Cash Room (room 2127). No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in.
 
#​##