---
title: "**UPDATED** Tomorrow: Treasury Secretary Lew to Announce New Efforts to Assist Struggling and Prospective Homeowners, Provide More Affordable Options For Renters"
date: 2014-06-26
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/06262014
---
*(Archived Content)*
 ****Additional information is provided on the Secretary’s meeting with homeowners tomorrow morning.****    **WASHINGTON** – TOMORROW, June 26, 2014, U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will deliver closing remarks at **the Making Home Affordable (MHA) Fifth Anniversary Summit, which will bring together key stakeholders from across the country to discuss best practices in the MHA program. During his remarks, the Secretary will announce ****additional policies to assist struggling homeowners, provide more affordable housing options for renters, and expand access to credit for borrowers.  These new efforts build on previous Administration initiatives that helped stabilize the housing market by providing direct assistance to struggling homeowners and transforming the manner in which the housing industry responded to the financial crisis. ** **Before speaking at the Summit, Secretary Lew will meet with homeowners, housing counselors and the leadership of the Greater Washington Urban League (GWUL). The Greater Washington Urban League is a non-profit organization that provides direct services and advocacy to more than 65,000 individuals each year and manages and administers about 30 programs in the areas of education, employment and housing and community development. There will be a photo spray opportunity of the Secretary’s visit. ** **Press logistics: ** **10:30 AM EDT** SECRETARY LEW MEETS WITH HOMEOWNERS AND HOUSING COUNSELORS AT THE GREATER WASHINGTON URBAN LEAGUE 2901 14th Street, NW Washington, D.C. There is a photo spray opportunity of the Secretary’s visit. Press planning to attend this b-roll opportunity must RSVP to Stephanie Ma at [Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov](mailto:Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov). All cameras must arrive on site at 10:40 a.m. for equipment sweeps.   **4:45 PM EDT** **SECRETARY LEW DELIVERS CLOSING REMARKS AT 5TH ANNUAL MAKING HOME AFFORDABLE SUMMIT** U.S. Department of the Treasury Department Cash Room 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, D.C. The Secretary’s remarks are open to press; however the deadline to RSVP has passed. For additional information, please contact Stephanie Ma at [Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov](mailto:Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov).  The Secretary’s remarks will also be webcast live at [https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts](https://home.treasury.gov/news/webcasts). Confirmed press attendees with camera equipment should arrive at the South Entrance (on 15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Avenue) no later than **3:30 p.m**. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by **4:30 p.m.** at the North entrance (Pennsylvania Avenue and 15th Street). ###