---
title: '**UPDATED** U.S. Treasury Secretary Lew To Visit Detroit, Michigan April 24-25'
date: 2014-04-21
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/04212014
---

*(Archived Content)*

​**Two-Day Visit Highlights the Obama Administration’s Continued Commitment to Detroit’s Revitalization**  ****Updated to reflect logistical details for media coverage****   **WASHINGTON –** On April 24-25, U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will travel to Detroit, Michigan to highlight the Obama Administration’s continued commitment to the city’s revitalization and explore ways to promote job creation and economic growth. On Thursday, April 24, the Secretary will convene a meeting with foundation leaders to discuss ways the non-profit sector can help spur Detroit’s revitalization by developing and investing in programs that support economic development, promote education and workforce skills training, and increase access to capital.  On Friday, April 25, the Secretary will tour New Center Stamping, a metal stamping business in Detroit which received $3.7 million in funding from the Treasury Department’s State Small Business Credit Initiative (SSBCI).  These SSBCI funds were used to backstop a $7.5 million loan which the company said has saved existing jobs and will allow it to expand its workforce.  There will be a brief media availability following the Secretary’s tour, a portion of which will also be open to cameras for b-roll.  Press call times and additional details are forthcoming. Also on Friday, the Secretary will meet with area business and community leaders to discuss the condition of Detroit’s economy.  
**Press logistics: ** 


**10:00 AM EDT**



Secretary Jacob J. Lew



Tour of New Center Stamping facility



950 East Milwaukee Street



Detroit, Michigan



The Secretary’s tour is open for b-roll. Media planning to attend must RSVP to Sarah Logan at[Sarah.Logan@treasury.gov](mailto:Sarah.Logan@treasury.gov)by Thursday, April 24 at 5:00 p.m.**To attend the b-roll, press must arrive between 8:45 to 9:15 a.m. to allow time for security sweeps.**Parking is available on the north side of Milwaukee Street and the Chrysler Service Drive (Highway 75). Additional information about New Center Stamping can be found here:[www.newcenter.net](http://www.newcenter.net/).



**11:00 AM EDT**



Secretary Jacob J. Lew



Media availability at the New Center Stamping facility



950 East Milwaukee Street



Detroit, Michigan



Media planning to attend must RSVP to Sarah Logan at[Sarah.Logan@treasury.gov](mailto:Sarah.Logan@treasury.gov)by Thursday, April 24 at 5:00 p.m.**Members of the media who plan to attend the media availability, but not the b-roll, must arrive between 10:15 a.m. and 10:30 a.m**. Parking is available on the north side of Milwaukee Street and the Chrysler Service Drive (Highway 75).




###
