---
title: 'Tuesday: Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew to Travel to Iowa to Highlight Investment in Manufacturing, Jobs, and Economic Growth'
date: 2014-07-24
draft: false
press_release_number: JL07242014
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/jl07242014
---

*(Archived Content)*

  **WASHINGTON** – On Tuesday, July 29, 2014, U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will travel to Davenport, Iowa to highlight the Obama Administration’s commitment to fostering economic growth, expanding opportunity, and investing in advanced manufacturing.  While in Iowa, Secretary Lew will tour Alcoa’s Davenport Works facility, which is central to Alcoa’s aerospace and automotive business.  The Davenport facility employs more than 2,400 people, and has been at the forefront of American manufacturing for decades.      The 130-acre facility is also home to the world’s largest aluminum rolling mill, and produces military-grade aluminum that will be used in the all-new Ford F-150.  Alcoa recently announced a $300 million state-of-the art expansion that will create an additional 150 full-time jobs and help meet increasing demand for aluminum in the automotive industry.  There will be a photo and b-roll opportunity during the Secretary’s tour, and a brief media availability at the conclusion of the tour.  **Press Logistics: **   **12:15 PM CDT**  SECRETARY LEW TOURS ALCOA’S DAVENPORT WORKS FACILITY Alcoa Davenport Works 4879 State Street Riverdale, Iowa 52722   There will be a b-roll opportunity of the Secretary’s tour for TV cameras and still photographers.  Media planning to attend must RSVP to Lori Lecker at [Lori.Lecker@alcoa.com](mailto:Lori.Lecker@alcoa.com)  by 5:00 p.m. on Monday, July 28.  Press call times and additional details forthcoming.  For safety reasons, all visitors must wear safety glasses and closed-toe shoes.   **1:30 PM CDT** SECRETARY LEW HOLDS BRIEF MEDIA AVAILABILITY Alcoa Davenport Works 4879 State Street Riverdale, Iowa 52722   The availability is open press.  Media planning to attend must RSVP to Lori Lecker at [Lori.Lecker@alcoa.com](mailto:Lori.Lecker@alcoa.com) by 5:00 p.m. on Monday, July 28.  Press call times and additional details forthcoming.    ###
