---
title: Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew to attend IMF, World Bank Spring Meetings and G-20 Meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors
date: 2014-04-07
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/04072014
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON **– Secretary Jacob J. Lew will attend the spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank, and the G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting in Washington, April 10-11, 2014.    On April 10, Secretary Lew will attend a meeting of the G-20 as well as a working dinner. He will continue meetings with the G-20 the next day at the IMF in Washington to discuss the state of the global economy and policies to promote shared growth and financial stability.
  
On April 11, the Secretary will attend the spring meetings of the IMF and the World Bank.  As well as reviewing the global economic outlook, the meetings will also discuss the situation in Ukraine. Later that day, Secretary Lew will hold a press conference. Additional details on the Secretary’s bilateral schedule for the week will be announced in the days ahead. **Press Logistics:** **Note: All press must be credentialed for the 2014 Spring Meetings.** **Friday, April 11 ** **12:00 PM EDT ** G20 FAMILY PHOTO IMF HQ2 Atrium Washington, DC This event is open press. For additional information, please contact [G20FinanceMedia@treasury.gov.au](mailto:G20FinanceMedia@treasury.gov.au). **6:00 PM EDT** SECRETARY LEW HOLDS A PRESS CONFERENCE The George Washington University Jack Morton Memorial Building- Auditorium Washington, DC This event is open press. Media who wish to attend must RSVP to Stephanie Ma at [Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov](mailto:Stephanie.Ma@treasury.gov) by Thursday, April 10 at 4:00 p.m. Additional details will be provided in the days ahead. ###
