---
title: 'Wednesday: Secretary Lew to Travel to Charlotte, North Carolina to Highlight American Manufacturing and Innovation, Discuss Currency Redesign'
date: 2015-08-17
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/08172015
---

*(Archived Content)*

​**WASHINGTON **– U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will travel to Charlotte, North Carolina on Wednesday, August 19 to highlight the Obama Administration’s commitment to fostering economic growth through innovation and manufacturing.   While in North Carolina, Secretary Lew will tour Corning’s facility in Midland, which manufactures and develops optical fiber.  For over 160 years, Corning has applied its specialty in optical communications to develop products, create new industries and meet the growing global demand for broadband.  Secretary Lew will also participate in a roundtable with local residents hosted by Charlotte Mayor Dan Clodfelter to discuss currency redesign and the new $10 bill.  While in Charlotte, the Secretary will also meet with local business and community leaders.   
**Press Logistics:** **11:45 AM EDT** SECRETARY LEW TOURS CORNING Corning Incorporated 14556 Highway 601 Midland, North Carolina 28107 There will be a b-roll opportunity of the Secretary’s tour for TV cameras and still photographers.  Media planning to attend must RSVP to Isolde Karro at (828) 305-5416 or karroi@corning.com by noon on Tuesday, August 18.  Press should arrive by 11:30 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up.  For safety reasons, all visitors must wear safety glasses, long pants, and closed-toe shoes.  #​## 
​
