---
title: 'May 21: Open Meeting of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission'
date: 2015-05-19
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/05192015
---

*(Archived Content)*

​WASHINGTON – On Thursday, May 21, 2015, the U.S. Treasury Department will host a public meeting of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC).  Amias Gerety, Acting Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions, will deliver opening remarks on ways to build the financial knowledge and skills of young people through employment opportunities like summer jobs. Additional speakers include Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Director Richard Cordray, Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Department of Labor’s Employment and Training Administration Portia Wu, and Acting Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Career, Technical, and Adult Education Johan Uvin. The agenda for this meeting will focus on financial capability and the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act. The FLEC is chaired by the U.S. Treasury Department and comprised of 22 federal entities. Its mission is to promote the financial literacy of the American people.
WHO:            Amias Gerety, Acting Assistant Secretary, Financial Institutions, U.S. Treasury Department Richard Cordray, Director, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Portia Wu, Assistant Secretary, Employment and Training Administration, U.S. Department of Labor Johan Uvin, Acting Assistant Secretary, Office of Career, Technical, and Adult Education, U.S. Department of Education Melissa Koide, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Consumer Policy, U.S. Treasury Department Additional members of the Commission             
WHAT:        Financial Literacy and Education Commission Public Meeting  
WHEN:        Thursday, May 21, 2015 9:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. EDT WHERE:       U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW Washington, DC 20220 
RSVP:            Media planning to attend must RSVP by 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday, May 20 to Ronda Buckmon at ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov. Media without press credentials issued by Treasury must include the following information for access into the building: (1) full legal name, (2) date of birth, (3) Social Security number, and (4) country of citizenship. Media attending  with camera equipment must arrive at the South Entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) no later than 7:45 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds, and equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by 8:30 a.m. at the main entrance (Pennsylvania Avenue/New York Avenue and 15th Street). A live webcast will be available at /news/webcasts. 
###​
