---
title: 'Thursday: U.S. Treasury Secretary Lew to Visit Miami, Florida to Highlight President Obama’s Trade Agenda'
date: 2015-03-16
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/03192015
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON –** Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will travel to Miami, Florida, March 19-20, to highlight the strength of the U.S. economy and discuss President Obama’s trade agenda, which will enable the United States to overcome barriers to trade, help to level the playing field for U.S. firms, and support quality jobs for American workers.   On Thursday, March 19, Secretary Lew will tour  PortMiami’s on-dock rail facilities.  Completed in partnership with the U.S. Department of Transportation, the State of Florida, and Florida East Coast Railway in October 2014, recent renovations to the rail yard have reconnected the Port with the national rail system.  The restored tracks expedite movement of goods, carrying products from Miami throughout the United States.   Also on Thursday, the Secretary will attend a roundtable with local business and community leaders hosted by Donna Shalala, President of the University of Miami.    On Friday, March 20, the Secretary will participate in a moderated conversation hosted by the Greater Miami Chamber of Commerce and Miami Dade College.   **Press Logistics: ** **Thursday, March 19 ** **2:00 PM EDT ** SECRETARY LEW VISITS PORTMIAMI’S INTERMODAL RAIL YARD Port of Miami-Dade 1015 North America Way Miami, FL  33132   There will be a b-roll opportunity of the Secretary’s tour for TV cameras and still photographers.  Media planning to attend must RSVP to Andria Muniz-Amador at [Amuniz@miamidade.gov](mailto:Amuniz@miamidade.gov) by 10:00 a.m. on Thursday, March 19.  Press call times and additional details are forthcoming.   **Friday, March 20 ** **8:30 AM EDT ** MODERATED CONVERSATION HOSTED BY THE GREATER MIAMI CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND MIAMI DADE COLLEGE Miami Dade College, Wolfson Campus 300 NE 2nd Avenue Miami, FL 33132   This event is open press. For additional information, please contact Juan Mendieta at [jmendiet@mdc.edu](mailto:jmendiet@mdc.edu)   ###
