---
title: Secretary Lew to Attend G-20 Finance Ministers Meeting in Turkey and to Visit India for the Fifth Annual U.S.-India Economic and Financial Partnership Meeting, February 9-12, 2015
date: 2015-02-04
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/002042015
---

*(Archived Content)*

​  **WASHINGTON –** The U.S. Department of the Treasury today announced that Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will attend the G-20 Meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors to be held in Istanbul, Turkey on February 9-10, 2015.  Following the G-20, Secretary Lew will travel to India on February 11 and 12, to meet with business leaders in Mumbai and to participate in the U.S.-India Economic and Financial Partnership in Delhi. While at the G-20, the Secretary will meet with his international counterparts to discuss measures to promote global economic growth. Following-up on President Obama’s recent visit to India, the Secretary will visit Mumbai and Delhi to further our cooperation on economic issues of importance to both nations.  On Wednesday, February 11, the Secretary will be in Mumbai for meetings with Reserve Bank of India Governor Raghuram Rajan and meetings with Indian business and financial leaders.  On Thursday, February 12, the Secretary will be in Delhi to co-chair the fifth annual meeting of the U.S.-India Economic and Financial Partnership with Indian Minister of Finance Arun Jaitley.  This meeting will focus on the state of the economy and outlook in India and the United States, as well as the Indian government efforts to advance economic reforms, encourage investment, and boost growth.  The United States and India recognize the importance of expanding bilateral economic engagement, noting the rapid growth of U.S.-India economic ties and the increasing range of global macroeconomic and financial issues on which the United States and India cooperate.  Further information regarding the Secretary’s schedule will be made available in the days ahead. If you plan to attend the G-20 and/or the U.S.-India Economic and Financial Partnership please email Hagar Chemali at [Hagar.Chemali@treasury.gov](mailto:Hagar.Chemali@treasury.gov) with your travel dates and contact information, so Treasury can communicate logistical updates regarding the Secretary’s schedule as necessary. Further information regarding media accreditation for the G-20 is available at [https://g20.org/g20press/](https://g20.org/g20press/). ###
