---
title: 'May 6: Treasury Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization to Host Public Meeting'
date: 2015-05-05
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/05042015
---

*(Archived Content)*

   **WASHINGTON **– TOMORROW, May 6, 2015, the U.S. Treasury Department’s Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization will host a public meeting for small businesses during National Small Business Week. The event will bring together Treasury officials, industry associations, and small businesses for a series of keynotes and panel discussions on the importance of investing in capability, acquisition trends, and strategies to successfully compete for opportunities in the federal marketplace. The agenda will include remarks from Deputy Secretary Sarah Bloom Raskin.  WHO:              Sarah Bloom Raskin, Deputy Secretary of the U.S. Treasury Department Jose L. Arrieta, Director of the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization, U.S. Treasury Department Iris B. Cooper, Senior Procurement Executive, U.S Treasury Department Sonny Bhagowalia, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Treasury Department David Dasher, Bureau Chief Procurement Officer, Internal Revenue Service  Deborah Smith, Bureau Chief Procurement Officer, U.S. Mint Gustavo Calderon, Compass Roger Jordan, Professional Services Council Brian Nault, Blue Water Federal Kay Olive, Washington Roundtable Francis Rose, Federal News Radio Raj Sharma, CENCEO Consulting Jeff Shen, ACT-IAC Kristina Tanasichuk, Government Technology Services Coalition Olessia Taylor, National Contract Management Association WHAT:          Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization Public Meeting WHEN:          Wednesday, May 6, 2015 9:00 a.m. – 12:45 p.m. EDT WHERE:        Cash Room U.S. Treasury Department     1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, DC RSVP:            Media planning to attend must RSVP to Ronda Buckmon at ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov by 4:00 p.m. TODAY. Media without press credentials issued by Treasury must include the following information for access into the building: (1) full legal name, (2) date of birth, (3) Social Security number, and (4) country of citizenship.  Media attending with camera equipment must arrive at the south entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) no later than 7:45 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds, and equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by 8:45 a.m. at the north entrance (Pennsylvania Avenue/New York Avenue and 15th Street). A live webcast will be available at /news/webcasts  ###
