---
title: Commerce and Treasury Announce Second U.S. - Cuba Regulatory Dialogue in Washington, DC, February 17-18, 2016
date: 2016-02-10
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/02122016
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON **– Today, the Departments of Commerce and the Treasury announced the second round of the U.S.-Cuba Regulatory Dialogue in Washington, DC, February 17-18, 2016.  Secretary of Commerce Penny Pritzker will open the Dialogue with Cuba's Minister of Foreign Trade and Investment Rodrigo Malmierca.  For the remainder of the Dialogue, experts from the Departments of Commerce, Treasury, and State will describe the regulatory changes enacted on January 27, 2016 that affect the export and financing of certain goods and services authorized for Cuba and the challenges identified by U.S. companies to doing business in Cuba. The Cuban delegation will discuss the relevant parts of Cuba's economic system, including importing goods and services and conducting financial transactions.    “Our second U.S.-Cuba Regulatory Dialogue is another opportunity to work directly with our Cuban counterparts to better understand the way our two governments and economies can work together in support of the Cuban people,” said Secretary Pritzker.  “Following my trip to Havana last year, I am eager to use this dialogue as a chance to make continued progress that benefits both countries.” “Our successive actions amending the Cuban Assets Control Regulations are empowering the Cuban people," said Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew.  "This Dialogue, the second of its kind, will allow for discussion of evolving regulations and our efforts to continue to promote a democratic future for the Cuban people.” The Dialogue will continue to build trust and a framework for constructive bilateral engagement to enable the U.S. regulatory changes to more fully benefit the Cuban people.  Your coverage is invited. **WHAT**:Opening Remarks by Secretary Pritzker and Minister Malmierca at the Second U.S.-Cuba Regulatory Dialogue **WHEN**:Wednesday, February 17, 2016             **WHERE**:        Herbert C. Hoover Building   1401 Constitution Ave NW   Washington, DC 20230 **RSVP**:  The opening remarks for this event are open to press, the dialogue following the opening remarks is closed press. Media should RSVP to the Office of Public Affairs at 202-482-4883 or publicaffairs@doc.gov. ###
