---
title: 'Thursday: Open Meeting of the Financial Literacy Education Commission'
date: 2016-02-01
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/02012016x
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON **– On Thursday, February 4, 2016, the U.S. Treasury Department will host a public meeting of the Financial Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC).  Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will deliver opening remarks, and additional speakers include Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Richard Cordray, and U.S. Department of Education Acting Secretary John B. King, Jr. The agenda for this meeting will focus on the role of government agencies in promoting financial inclusion, and leading practices to promote financial capability among young people seeking higher education will also be discussed. The FLEC is chaired by the U.S. Treasury Department and comprised of 22 federal entities. Its mission is to promote the financial literacy of the American people. **WHO**:  Jacob J. Lew, Secretary, U.S. Treasury Department Richard Cordray, Director, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau John B. King, Jr., Acting Secretary, U.S. Department of Education **WHAT**:       Financial Literacy and Education Commission Public Meeting **WHEN**:       Thursday, February 4, 2016 9:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. EST **WHERE**:      U.S. Department of the Treasury Cash Room 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW Washington, DC 20220 **RSVP**:  Media planning to attend must RSVP by 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday, February 3 to Ronda Buckmon at ronda.buckmon@treasury.gov.   Media without press credentials issued by Treasury must include the following information for access into the building: (1) full legal name, (2) date of birth, (3) Social Security number, and (4) country of citizenship. Media attending with camera equipment must arrive at the South Entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) no later than 7:45 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds, and equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by 8:30 a.m. at the main entrance (Pennsylvania Avenue/New York Avenue and 15th Street).   A live webcast will be available at /news/webcasts ###
