---
title: "U.S. Treasury Secretary Lew to Travel to Alaska to Meet with Local Officials, Business and Community Leaders"
date: 2016-05-17
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/05172016
---
*(Archived Content)*
**WASHINGTON** – On Wednesday, May 18, 2016, U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will travel to Anchorage, Alaska to join Mayor Ethan Berkowitz for meetings with business and community leaders about Treasury’s financial inclusion initiatives and other measures to grow the economy.  There will be a photo opportunity during the Secretary’s visit to a small business. Secretary Lew will participate in a financial inclusion roundtable with executives from Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) and community leaders hosted by Mayor Berkowitz.  Secretary Lew will also join a business roundtable with Mayor Berkowitz and local businesses.  These meetings are closed press. After the meetings, Secretary Lew and Mayor Berkowitz will walk from the City Hall to Salad Box, a small business that received financing from a local CDFI, Alaska Growth Capital. There will be a video and photo opportunity for photographers and TV cameras to join the Secretary’s walk from City Hall to Salad Box and take photos and b-roll. **WHO**:        Jacob J. Lew, Treasury Secretary                    Ethan Berkowitz, Mayor, City of Anchorage **WHAT**:      Photo opportunity **WHEN**       Wednesday, May 18, 2016                    11:50 a.m. AKDT **WHERE**:    City Hall 1st Floor Lobby                    632 W 6th Ave                    Anchorage, AK 99501                    Secretary Lew and Mayor Berkowitz will walk from City Hall to the Salad Box.           Salad Box                     400 D Street                     Anchorage, AK 99501 **RSVP**:     Media planning to attend must RSVP to Whitney Smith at [Whitney.Smith@treasury.gov](mailto:Whitney.Smith@treasury.gov). ###