---
title: "Briefing to Release Social Security and Medicare Trustees Reports Announced For June 22, 2016"
date: 2016-06-15
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/06152016
---
*(Archived Content)*
**WASHINGTON **– On Wednesday, June 22, 2016 at 10:30 a.m. EDT, Treasury Secretary and Managing Trustee Jacob J. Lew will be joined by members of the Social Security and Medicare Boards of Trustees – Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell, Labor Secretary Thomas E. Perez and Acting Social Security Commissioner Carolyn W. Colvin– for a press briefing to discuss the release of the annual Trustees Reports. **WHO**:    Secretary of Treasury and Managing Trustee Jacob J. Lew Secretary of Health and Human Services and Trustee Sylvia M. Burwell Secretary of Labor and Trustee Thomas E. Perez Acting Commissioner of Social Security and Trustee Carolyn W. Colvin   **WHAT**: Statements from Trustees followed by background briefing by senior officials **WHEN**: Wednesday, June 22, 2016 10:30 AM EDT  **WHERE**:       U.S. Department of the Treasury Media Room (4121) 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, DC   ***Copies of the Social Security and Medicare Trustees Reports will be available at the briefing. *** *The statements from Trustees are open press, and a live webcast will also be available. The background briefing by senior officials following the statements is pen and pad only; no cameras or recording devices will be allowed. ***Please note: there is no WiFi available at the Treasury Department. ** ** *Space is limited. ***All interested media, including media with Treasury press credentials, planning to cover the Trustees must RSVP by 4:00 p.m. on Monday, June 20 to Ronda Buckmon at Ronda.Buckmon@treasury.gov.  Media without Treasury press credentials must provide Ms. Buckmon with the following information (4) for access into the building: 1. full legal name, 2. date of birth, 3. Social Security number and 4. country of citizenship.**** ** *Press with camera equipment should arrive at the South entrance (15th Street and Alexander Hamilton Place) no later than 9:00 a.m. to allow time for equipment sweeps. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in.* ###