---
title: Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew to Travel to San Juan, Puerto Rico
date: 2016-05-09
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/05092016x
---

*(Archived Content)*

**WASHINGTON – TODAY, Monday, May 9**, U.S. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew will travel to San Juan, Puerto Rico as part of the Administration’s continued engagement with the Commonwealth to overcome its debt crisis. In San Juan, Secretary Lew will highlight how the crisis has already harmed the health, safety, and welfare of the 3.5 million Americans living in Puerto Rico. Secretary Lew will also reiterate his call for Congressional action that provides Puerto Rico with access to an orderly restructuring regime and independent oversight while respecting the Commonwealth’s self-governance. Secretary Lew will visit Eleanor Roosevelt Elementary School and Centro Médico de Puerto Rico, where he will hold a press availability. While in San Juan, Secretary Lew will also meet with officials from the Puerto Rican government along with business and community leaders. **Press Logistics:** **2:15 PM AST/EDT** **ELEANOR ROOSEVELT ELEMENTARY SCHOOL** Calle Ing. San Castillo, San Juan This event is open to traveling press. **4:15 PM AST/EDT** **PRESS AVAILABILITY WITH SECRETARY LEW** Centro Médico de Puerto Rico Barrio Monacillos, San Juan This event is open to all credentialed members of the media. Media planning to attend the event must RSVP by 12:00 PM AST today to Lina Francis at Kalina.Francis@treasury.gov.   Media attending with camera equipment must arrive no later than 2:15 PM AST to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. All other media attending the press availability should arrive by 3:45 PM AST.  ###
