---
title: "Media Advisory: Treasury Secretary John W. Snow to Lead “National Teach Children to Save” Day in New York"
date: 2025-12-23
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/js1442
---
*(Archived Content)*

js-1442
 
**Treasury Officials to Join the American Bankers Association in Schools Across the Country to Promote Savings to Children **
 
Treasury Secretary John W. Snow will lead Treasury's efforts in the eighth annual "National Teach Children to Save Day."  Secretary Snow will teach a fifth-grade class in East Harlem's TwentiethSchool District in New York City.  Secretary Snow will lead a lesson on the importance of saving for the future and how budgeting can help individuals achieve their goals.  This nationwide event is sponsored by the American Bankers Association Education Foundation. More information on "National Teach Children to Save Day" can be found at [http://www.aba.com/](http://www.aba.com/)
 
In addition to Secretary Snow, several other Treasury officials will teach financial education lessons in classrooms across the country on Thursday.  More information on these events will be available next week. 
 
**WHO: **        
 
Secretary of the Treasury John W. SnowMr. Donald G. Ogilvie, President and CEO, American Bankers AssociationMs. Dara Duguay, Director of Citigroup's Office of Financial EducationMr. John Bryant, Founder, Chairman and CEO, Operation HOPE
 
**WHAT: **
 
Teaching a Financial Education lesson to a fifth grade class in conjunction with "National Teach Children to Save Day", sponsored by the AmericanBankers Association Education Foundation 
 
**WHEN:** 
 
Thursday, April 22, 20049:30 am EDT
 
**WHERE:**         
 
P.S. 50 Vito Marcantonio433 E. 100 St.New York, New York10029
 
****Media interested in covering this event should call Treasury's Office of Public Affairs at 202/622-2960 **