---
title: "Updated to Include: RSVP Info, Agenda, and Webcast Link ***Media Advisory*** Treasury Announces Federal Insurance Office Conference To Discuss Modernizing And Improving The Insurance Regulation System"
date: 2025-12-23
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/tg1380
---
*(Archived Content)*
**WASHINGTON** – As part of the Administration’s ongoing work to implement financial reform legislation, the Federal Insurance Office will host a conference, entitled “Insurance Regulation in the United States: Modernization and Improvement” on December 9, 2011 in the Treasury Department’s Cash Room. This conference will bring together state insurance regulators, federal government officials, consumer organizations, representatives of the insurance industry, and insurance experts to have a meaningful exchange on potential areas for insurance regulatory reform. Created under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, the Federal Insurance Office monitors all aspects of the insurance industry, including identifying issues contributing to systemic risk. It also monitors the availability and affordability of insurance to traditionally underserved populations; advises the Treasury Secretary on major domestic insurance policy issues; and develops and coordinates federal policy on international insurance regulatory matters. Early next year, the Federal Insurance Office will issue its first major report to Congress on how to modernize and improve the system of insurance regulation in the United States. **WHO:**   Treasury’s Federal Insurance Office **WHAT:**“Insurance Regulation in the United States: Modernization and Improvement”           Conference **WHEN:**December 9, 2011   9:00 AM – 1:00 PM EST **WHERE:**       Department of Treasury   Cash Room   1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW   Washington, DC **The conference will also be ****webcast livE. ** **Members of the media interested in covering the event must RSVP by 1:00 PM, Thursday, December 8, 2011. ** Media attending with camera equipment should arrive at the Moat Entrance (south side of the Treasury building, adjacent to the Hamilton entrance) at 7:00 AM to allow time for equipment sweeps and set-up. No vehicles will be permitted onto Treasury grounds; equipment must be carried in. All other media should arrive by 8:15 AM and should enter the Treasury building through the Pennsylvania Avenue Entrance.  **Please Note:** Media without Treasury press credentials planning to attend must contact Frances Anderson in Treasury’s Office of Public Affairs at (202) 622-2960 with the following information: name, Social Security number, date of birth and country of citizenship. This information also may be emailed to [frances.anderson@treasury.gov](mailto:frances.anderson@treasury.gov). Congressional and White House press passes will not grant one access to Treasury.  A draft conference agenda is below. All sessions are open press unless otherwise noted. This agenda is subject to change: **9:00 AM           Opening Remarks** **    ****Neal Wolin, Deputy Treasury Secretary** **9:15 AM           Panel 1: Consumer Protection and the Business of Insurance ** **10:25 AM         Panel 2: International Developments** **11:50 AM         Panel 3: Prudential Standards for Insurance Companies** **12:55 PM          Closing Remarks** **  ****  Michael McRaith, Director, Federal Insurance Office **