---
title: "UPDATED: Secretary Snow Visits Des Moines, Iowa on Friday Trip Will Include Launch of \"Keelboat Nickel\""
date: 2025-12-23
draft: false
url: /news/weekly-public-schedule/js1860
---
*(Archived Content)*

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS
 
js-1860
 
 
 U.S. Treasury Secretary John W. Snow will visit Des Moines, Iowa on Friday, August 20 to meet with local business leaders and discuss the President's efforts to strengthen the economy and create jobs. He also will join U.S. Senator Charles Grassley to present the new "Keelboat Nickel" at the Iowa State Fair. 
"As a result of the President's economic leadership, we have overcome a recession and seen 11 straight months of job creation, totaling nearly 1.5 million new U.S. jobs since August 2003," said Secretary Snow.  "The President's tax reform policies have ensured that more than 1 million Iowa taxpayers will have lower income tax bills in 2004."
 
During this trip to Iowa, Secretary Snow also will discuss the Administration's efforts to control health care costs, reduce frivolous lawsuits and ensure that America has reliable and affordable sources of energy.
 
Recent indicators show that President Bush's economic policies continue to move the economy forward.  According to the Labor Department, t he national unemployment rate declined to 5.5% in July – down 0.8 percentage point from a peak of 6.3% in June 2003 and the lowest rate since October 2001.  At 5.5%, the unemployment rate is below the average of the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s.  Employment over the last year was up in 46 of the 50 states and the unemployment rate was down in all regions and in 47 of the 50 states.  
 
The following events are open to the media, which must present media credentials or photo ID:
 
Friday, August 20
 
Tour of the Iowa Clinic , P.C.**8:00 am CDT**** (updated time)**5950 University AvenueWest Des Moines, IA** Media should arrive by 8:00 am
 
Presentation of the new "Keelboat Nickel", with Senator Charles Grassley10:00 am CDTIowaState FairRiley StageEast 30th Street and University Ave.Des Moines, IA** There will be an opportunity for media interviews following the event.** Children who attend will receive a new nickel following the event, and adults may exchange their bills and coins for rolls of nickels. ** More information on the Keelboat Nickel:
 
The "Keelboat Nickel" is the second new design in the U.S. Mint's Westward Journey Nickel series, which commemorates Lewis and Clark's expedition and the Louisiana Purchase. The "Keelboat Nickel," which depicts the boat Lewis and Clark used in their expedition as they traveled the Missouri River in search of a northwest passage to the Pacific Ocean, is the second of two designs released in 2004. The first, released in March, features symbols of peace and friendship from the original Peace Medal commissioned for Lewis and Clark's expedition. The medals were presented to Native American chiefs and other leaders as tokens of goodwill. Two additional designs will be released in 2005. A depiction of Monticello will return to the nickel in 2006.
 
-30-